THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL : THE DEFINITIVE EDITION

Anne Frank

Edited by Otto H. Frank and Mirjam Pressler
Translated by Susan Massotty

-- : --

BOOK FLAP

Anne Frank's The Diary of a Young Girl is among the most enduring documents of the twentieth century. Since its publication in 1947, it has been read by tens of millions of people all over the world. It remains a beloved and deeply admired testament to the indestructable nature of the human spirit.

Restore in this Definitive Edition are diary entries that had been omitted from the original edition. These passages, which constitute 30 percent more material, reinforce the fact that Anne was first and foremost a teenage girl, not a remote and flawless symbol. She fretted about, and tried to copie with, her own emerging sexuality. Like many young girls, she often found herself in disagreement with her mother. And like any teenager, she veered between the carefree nature of a child and the full-fledged sorrow of an adult. Anne emerges more human, more vulnerable, and more vital than ever.

Anne Frank and her family, fleeing the horrors of Nazi occupation, hid in the back of an Amsterdam warehouse for two years. She was thirteen when the family went into the Secret Annex, and in these pages she grows to be a young woman and a wise observer of human nature as well. With unusual insight, she reveals the relations between eight people living under extraordinary conditions, facing hunger, the ever-present threat of discovery and death, complete estrangement from the outside world, and above all, the boredom, the petty misunderstandings, and the frustrations of living under such unbearable strain, in such confined quarters.

A timely story rediscovered by each new generation, The Diary of a Young Girl stands without peer. For both young readers and adults it continues to bring to life this young woman, who for a time survived the worst horror of the modern world had seen -- and who remained triumphantly and heartbreakingly human throughout her ordeal. For those who know and love Anne Frank, The Definitive Edition is a chance to discover her anew. For readers who have not yet encountered her, this is the edition to cherish.

ANNE FRANK was born on June 12, 1929. She died while imprisoned at Bergen-Belsen, three months short of her sixteenth birthday. OTTO H. FRANK was the only member of his immediate framily to survive the Holocaust. He died in 1980. MIRJAM PRESSLER is a popular writer of books for young adults. She lives in Germany. 

Translated by Susan Massotty. 

-- : --

FOREWORD 

Anne Frank kept a diary from June 12, 1942, to August 1, 1944. Initially, she wrote it strictly for herself. Then, one day in 1944, Gerrit Bolkestein, a member of the Dutch government in exile, announced in a radio broadcast from London that after the war he hoped to collect eyewitness accounts of the suffering of the Dutch people under the German occupation, which could be made available to the public. As an example, he specifically mentioned letters and diaries. 

Impressed by this speech, Anne Frank decided that when the war was over she would publish a book based on her diary. She began rewriting and editing her diary, improving on the text, omitting passages she didn't think were interesting enough and adding others from memory. At the same time, she kept up her original diary. In the scholarly work The Diary of Anne Frank: The Critical Edition (1989), Anne's first, unedited diary is referred to as version a, to distinguish it from her second, edited diary, which is known as version b. 

The last entry in Anne's diary is dated August 1, 1944. On August 4, 1944, the eight people hiding in the Secret Annex were arrested. Miep Gies and Bep Voskuijl, the two secretaries working in the building, found Anne's diaries strewn allover the floor. ,Miep Gies tucked them away in a desk drawer for safekeeping. After the war, when it became clear that Anne was dead, she gave the diaries, unread, to Anne's father, Otto Frank. 

After long deliberation, Otto Frank decided to fulfill his daughter's wish and publish her diary. He selected material from versions a and b, editing them into a shorter version later referred to as version c. Readers all over the world know this as The Diary of a fauna Girl. 

In making his choice, Otto Frank had to bear several points in mind. To begin with, the book had to be kept short so that it would fit in with a series put out by the Dutch publisher. In addition, several passages dealing with Anne's sexuality were omitted; at the time of the diary's initial publication, in 1947, it was not customary to write openly about sex, and certainly not in books for young adults. Out of respect for the dead, Otto Frank also omitted a number of unflattering passages about his wife and the other residents of the Secret Annex. Anne Frank, who was thirteen when she began her diary and fifteen when she was forced to stop, wrote without reserve about her likes and dislikes. 

When Otto Frank died in 1980, he willed his daughter's manuscripts to the Netherlands State Institute for War Documentation in Amsterdam. Because the authenticity of the diary had been challenged ever since its publication, the Institute for War Documentation ordered a thorough investigation. Once the diary was proved, beyond a shadow of a doubt, to be genuine, it was published in its entirety, along with the results of an exhaustive study. The Critical Edition contains not only versions a, band c, but also articles on the background of the Frank family, the circumstances surrounding their arrest and deportation, and the examination into Anne's handwriting, the document and the materials used. 

The Anne Frank-Fonds (Anne Frank Foundation) in Basel (Switzerland),. which as Otto Frank's sole heir had also inherited his daughter's copyrights, then decided to have anew, expanded edition of the diary published for general readers. This new edition in no way affects the integrity of the old one originally edited by Otto Frank, which brought the diary and its message to millions of people. The task of compthng the expanded edition was given to the writer and translator Mirjam Pressler. Otto Frank's original selection has now been supplemented with passages from Anne's a and b versions. Mirjam Pressler's definitive edition, approved by the Anne Frank-Fonds, contains approximately 30 percent more material and is intended to give the reader more insight into the world of Anne Frank. 

In writing her second version (b), Anne invented pseudonyms for the people who would appear in her book. She initially wanted to call herself Anne Aulis, and later Anne Robin. Otto Frank opted to call his family by their own names and to follow Anne's wishes with regard to the others. Over the years, the identity of the people who helped the family in the Secret Annex has become common knowledge. In this edition, the helpers are now referred to by their real names, as they so justly deserve to be. All other persons are named in accordance with the pseudonyms in The Critical Edition. The Institute for War Documentation has arbitrarily assigned initials to those persons wishing to remain anonymous. 

The real names of the other people hiding in the Secret Annex are: 

THE VAN PELS FAMILY 
(from Osnabriick, Germany): 

Auguste van Pels (born September 9, 1890) 
Hermann van Pels (born March 31, 1889) 
Peter van Pels (born November 8, 1926) 

Called by Anne, in her manuscript: Petronella, Hans and Alfred van Daan; and in the book: Petronella, Hermann and Peter van Daan. 

FRITZ PFEFFER 
(born April 30, 1889, in Giessen, Germany): 

Called by Anne, in her manuscript and in the book: Alfred Dussel. 

The reader may wish to bear in mind that much of this edition is based on the b version of Anne's diary, which she wrote when she was around fifteen years old. Occasionally, Anne went back and commented on a passage she had written earlier. These comments are clearly marked in this edition. Naturally, Anne's spelling and linguistic errors have been corrected. Otherwise, the text has basically been left as she wrote it, since any attempts at editing and clarification would be inappropriate in a historical document. 

-- : --

I hope I will be able to confide everything to you, as I have never been able to confide in anyone, and I hope you will be a great source of comfort and support. 

-- : --

June 12, 1942

I hope I will be able to confide everything to you, as I have never been able to confide in anyone, and I hope you will be a great source of comfort and support. 

COMMENT ADDED BY ANNE ON SEPTEMBER 28, 1942: So far you truly have been a areat source of comfort to me, and so has Kitty, whom I now write to regularly. This way of keeping a diary is much nicer, and now I can hardly wait for those moments when I'm able to write in you. Oh, I'm so alad I brought you along! 

SUNDAY, JUNE 14, 1942 

I'll begin from the moment I got you, the moment I saw you lying on the table among my other birthday presents. (I went along when you were bought, but that doesn't count.) 

On Friday, June 12, I was awake at six o'clock, which isn't surprising, since it was my birthday. But I'm not allowed to get up at that hour, so I had to control my curiosity until quarter to seven. When I couldn't wait any longer, I went to the dining room, where Moortje (the cat) welcomed me by rubbing against my legs. 

A little after seven I went to Daddy and Mama and then to the living room to open my presents, and you were the first thing I saw, maybe one of my nicest presents. Then a bouquet of roses, some peonies and a potted plant. From Daddy and Mama I got a blue blouse, a game, a bottle of grape juice, which to my mind tastes a bit like wine (after all, wine is made from grapes), a puzzle, a jar of cold cream, 2.50 guilders and a gift certificate for two books. I got another book as well, Camera Obscura (but Margot already has it, so I exchanged mine for something else), a platter of homemade cookies (which I made myself, of course, since I've become quite an expert at baking cookies), lots of candy and a strawberry tart from Mother. And a letter from Grammy, right on time, but of course that was just a coincidence. 

Then Hanneli came to pick me up, and we went to school. During recess I passed out cookies to my teachers and my class, and then it was time to get back to work. I didn't arrive home until five, since I went to gym with the rest of the class. (I'm not allowed to take part because my shoulders and hips tend to get dislocated.) As it was my birthday, I got to decide which game my classmates would play, and I chose volleyball. Afterward they all danced around me in a circle and sang "Happy Birthday." When I got home, Sanne Ledermann was already there. Ilse Wagner, Hanneli Goslar and Jacqueline van Maarsen came home with me after gym, since we're in the same class. Hanneli and Sanne used to be my two best friends. People who saw us together used to say, "There goes Anne, Hanne and Sanne." I only met Jacqueline van Maarsen when I started at the Jewish Lyceum, and now she's my best friend. Ilse is Hanneli's best friend, and Sanne goes to another school and has friends there. 

They gave me a beautiful book, Dutch Sasas and Lesends, but they gave me Volume II by mistake, so I exchanged two other books for Volume I. Aunt Helene brought me a puzzle, Aunt Stephanie a darling brooch and Aunt Leny a terrific book: Daisy Goes to the Mountains. 

This morning I lay in the bathtub thinking how wonderful it would be if I had a dog like Rin Tin Tin. I'd call him Rin Tin Tin too, and I'd take him to school with me, where he could stay in the janitor's room or by the bicycle racks when the weather was good. 

MONDAY, JUNE 15, 1942 

I had my birthday party on Sunday afternoon. The Rin Tin Tin movie was a big hit with my classmates. I got two brooches, a bookmark and two books. I'll start by saying a few things about my school and my class, beginning with the students. 

Betty Bloemendaal looks kind of poor, and I think she probably is. She lives on some obscure street in West Amsterdam, and none of us know where it is. She does very well at school, but that's because she works so hard, not because she's so smart. She's pretty quiet. 

Jacqueline van Maarsen is supposedly my best friend, but I've never had a real friend. At first I thought Jacque would be one, but I was badly mistaken. 

D.Q.* [* Initials have been assigned at random to those persons who prefer to remain anonymous.] is a very nervous girl who's always forgetting things, so the teachers keep assigning her extra homework as punishment. She's very kind, especially to G.Z. 

E.S. talks so much it isn't funny. She's always touching your hair or fiddling with your buttons when she asks you something. They say she can't stand me, but I don't care, since I don't like her much either.
 
Henny Mets is a nice girl with a cheerful disposition, except that she talks in a loud voice and is really childish when we're playing outdoors. Unfortunately, Henny has a girlfriend named Beppy who's a bad influence on her because she's dirty and vulgar. 

J.R. - I could write a whole book about her. J. is a detestable, sneaky, stuck-up, two-faced gossip who thinks she's so grown-up. She's really got Jacque under her spell, and that's a shame. J. is easily offended, bursts into tears at the slightest thing and, to top it all off, is a terrible show-off. Miss J. always has to be right. She's very rich, and has a closet full of the most adorable dresses that are way too old for her. She thinks she's gorgeous, but she's not. J. and I can't stand each other. 

Ilse Wagner is a nice girl with a cheerful disposition, but she's extremely fInicky and can spend hours moaning and groaning about something. Ilse likes me a lot. She's very smart, but lazy. 

Hanneli Goslar, or Lies as she's called at school, is a bit on the strange side. She's usually shy -- outspoken at horne, but reserved around other people. She blabs whatever you tell her to her mother. But she says what she thinks, and lately I've corne to appreciate her a great deal. 

Nannie van Praag-Sigaar is small, funny and sensible. I think she's nice. She's pretty smart. There isn't much else you can say about Nannie. Eefje de Jong is, in my opinion, terrific. Though she's only twelve, she's quite the lady. She acts as if I were a baby. She's also very helpful, and I like her. 

G.Z. is the prettiest girl in our class. She has a nice face, but is kind of dumb. I think they're going to hold her back a year, but of course I haven't told her that. 

COMMENT ADDED BY ANNE AT A LATER DATE: To my areat surprise, G.Z. wasn't held back a year after all. 

And sitting next to G.Z. is the last of us twelve girls, me. 

There's a lot to be said about the boys, or maybe not so much after all. 

Maurice Coster is one of my many admirers, but pretty much of a pest. Sallie Springer has a filthy mind, and rumor has it that he's gone all the way. Still, I think he's terrific, because he's very funny. 

Emiel Bonewit is G.Z.'s admirer, but she doesn't care. He's pretty boring. Rob Cohen used to be in love with me too, but I can't stand him anymore. He's an obnoxious, two-faced, lying, sniveling little goof who has an awfully high opinion of himself. 

Max van de Velde is a farm boy from Medemblik, but eminently suitable, as Margot would say. 

Herman Koopman also has a filthy mind, just like Jopie de Beer, who's a terrible flirt and absolutely girl-crazy.
 
Leo Blom is Jopie de Beer's best friend, but has been ruined by his dirty mind. 

Albert de Mesquita came from the Montessori School and skipped a grade. He's really smart. 

Leo Slager came from the same school, but isn't as smart. 

Ru Stoppelmon is a short, goofy boy from Almelo who transferred to this school in the middle of the year. 

C.N. does whatever he's not supposed to. 

Jacques Kocernoot sits behind us, next to C., and we (G. and I) laugh ourselves silly. 

Harry Schaap is the most decent boy in our class. He's nice. 

Werner Joseph is nice too, but all the changes taking place lately have made him too quiet, so he seems boring. Sam Salomon is one of those tough guys from across the tracks. A real brat. (Admirer!) 

Appie Riem is pretty Orthodox, but a brat too. 

SATURDAY, JUNE 20,1942 

Writing in a diary is a really strange experience for someone like me. Not only because I've never written anything before, but also because it seems to me that later on neither I nor anyone else will be interested in the musings of a thirteen-year-old schoolgirl. Oh well, it doesn't matter. I feel like writing, and I have an even greater need to get all kinds of things off my chest. 

"Paper has more patience than people." I thought of this saying on one of those days when I was feeling a little depressed and was sitting at home with my chin in my hands, bored and listless, wondering whether to stay in or go out. I finally stayed where I was, brooding. Yes, paper does have more patience, and since I'm not planning to let anyone else read this stiff-backed notebook grandly referred to as a "diary," unless I should ever find a real friend, it probably won't make a bit of difference. 

Now I'm back to the point that prompted me to keep a diary in the first place: I don't have a friend. 

Let me put it more clearly, since no one will believe that a thirteen year-old girl is completely alone in the world. And I'm not. I have loving parents and a sixteen-year-old sister, and there are about thirty people I can call friends. I have a throng of admirers who can't keep their adoring eyes off me and who sometimes have to resort to using a broken pocket mirror to try and catch a glimpse of me in the classroom. I have a family, loving aunts and a good home. No, on the surface I seem to have everything, except my one true friend. All I think about when I'm with friends is having a good time. I can't bring myself to talk about anything but ordinary everyday things. We don't seem to be able to get any closer, and that's the problem. Maybe it's my fault that we don't confide in each other. In any case, that's just how things are, and unfortunately they're not liable to change. This is why I've started the diary. 

To enhance the image of this long-awaited friend in my imagination, I don't want to jot down the facts in this diary the way most people would do, but I want the diary to be my friend, and I'm going to call this friend Kitty. 

Since no one would understand a word of my stories to Kitty if I were to plunge right in, I'd better provide a brief sketch of my life, much as I dislike doing so. 

My father, the most adorable father I've ever seen, didn't marry my mother until he was thirty-six and she was twenty-five. My sister Margot was born in Frankfurt am Main in Germany in 1926. I was born on June 12, 1929. I lived in Frankfurt until I was four. Because we're Jewish, my father immigrated to Holland in 1933, when he became the Managing Director of the Dutch Opekta Company, which manufactures products used in making jam. My mother, Edith Hollander Frank, went with him to Holland in September, while Margot and I were sent to Aachen to stay with our grandmother. Margot went to Holland in December, and I followed in February, when I was plunked down on the table as a birthday present for Margot. 

I started right away at the Montessori nursery school. I stayed there until I was six, at which time I started first grade. In sixth grade my teacher was Mrs. Kuperus, the principal. At the end of the year we were both in tears as we said a heartbreaking farewell, because I'd been accepted at the Jewish Lyceum, where Margot also went to school. 

Our lives were not without anxiety, since our relatives in Germany were suffering under Hitler's anti-Jewish laws. After the pogroms in 1938 my two uncles (my mother's brothers) fled Germany, finding safe refuge in North America. My elderly grandmother came to live with us. She was seventy-three years old at the time. 

After May 1940 the good times were few and far between: first there was the war, then the capitulation and then the arrival of the Germans, which is when the trouble started for the Jews. Our freedom was severely restricted by a series of anti-Jewish decrees: Jews were required to wear a yellow star; Jews were required to turn in their bicycles; Jews were forbidden to use street-cars; Jews were forbidden to ride in cars, even their own; Jews were required to do their shopping between 3 and 5 P.M.; Jews were required to frequent only Jewish-owned barbershops and beauty parlors; Jews were forbidden to be out on the streets between 8 P.M. and 6 A.M.; Jews were forbidden to attend theaters, movies or any other forms of entertainment; Jews were forbidden to use swimming pools, tennis courts, hockey fields or any other athletic fields; Jews were forbidden to go rowing; Jews were forbidden to take part in any athletic activity in public; Jews were forbidden to sit in their gardens or those of their friends after 8 P.M.; Jews were forbidden to visit Christians in their homes; Jews were required to attend Jewish schools, etc. You couldn't do this and you couldn't do that, but life went on. Jacque always said to me, "I don't dare do anything anymore, 'cause I'm afraid it's not allowed."
 
In the summer of 1941 Grandma got sick and had to have an operation, so my birthday passed with little celebration. In the summer of 1940 we didn't do much for my birthday either, since the fighting had just ended in Holland. Grandma died in January 1942. No one knows how often I think of her and still love her. This birthday celebration in 1942 was intended to make up for the others, and Grandma's candle was lit along with the rest. 

The four of us are still doing well, and that brings me to the present date of June 20, 1942, and the solemn dedication of my diary. 

SATURDAY, JUNE 20, 1942 

Dearest Kitty! Let me get started right away; it's nice and quiet now. Father and Mother are out and Margot has gone to play Ping-Pong with some other young people at her friend Trees's. I've been playing a lot of Ping-Pong myself lately. So much that five of us girls have formed a club. It's called "The Little Dipper Minus Two." A really silly name, but it's based on a mistake. We wanted to give our club a special name; and because there were five of us, we came up with the idea of the Little Dipper. We thought it consisted of five stars, but we turned out to be wrong. It has seven, like the Big Dipper, which explains the "Minus Two." Ilse Wagner has a Ping-Pong set, and the Wagners let us play in their big dining room whenever we want. Since we five Ping-Pong players like ice cream, especially in the summer, and since you get hot playing Ping-Pong, our games usually end with a visit to the nearest ice-cream parlor that allows Jews: either Oasis or Delphi. We've long since stopped hunting around for our purses or money -- most of the time it's so busy in Oasis that we manage to find a few generous young men of our acquaintance or an admirer to offer us more ice cream than we could eat in a week.
 
You're probably a little surprised to hear me talking about admirers at such a tender age. Unfortunately, or not, as the case may be, this vice seems to be rampant at our school. As soon as a boy asks if he can bicycle home with me and we get to talking, nine times out of ten I can be sure he'll become enamored on the spot and won't let me out of his sight for a second. His ardor eventually cools, especially since I ignore his passionate glances and pedal blithely on my way. If it gets so bad that they start rambling on about "asking Father's permission," I swerve slightly on my bike, my schoolbag falls, and the young man feels obliged to get off his bike and hand me the bag, by which time I've switched the conversation to another topic. These are the most innocent types. Of course, there are those who blow you kisses or try to take hold of your arm, but they're definitely knocking on the wrong door. I get off my bike and either refuse to make further use of their company or act as if I'm insulted and tell them in no uncertain terms to go on home without me. There you are. We've now laid the basis for our friendship. Until tomorrow. 

Yours, Anne 

SUNDAY, JUNE 21, 1942 

Dearest Kitty,

Our entire class is quaking in its boots. The reason, of course, is the upcoming meeting in which the teachers decide who'll be promoted to the next grade and who'll be kept back. Half the class is making bets. G.Z. and I laugh ourselves sick at the two boys behind us, C.N. and Jacques Kocernoot, who have staked their entire vacation savings on their bet. From morning to night, it's "You're going to pass, No, I'm not," "Yes, you are," "No, I'm not." Even G.'s pleading glances and my angry outbursts can't calm them down. If you ask me, there are so many dummies that about a quarter of the class should be kept back, but teachers are the most unpredictable creatures on earth. Maybe this time they'll be unpredictable in the right direction for a change. I'm not so worried about my girlfriends and myself. 

We'll make it. The only subject I'm not sure about is math. Anyway, all we can do is wait. Until then, we keep telling each other not to lose heart.
 
I get along pretty well with all my teachers. There are nine of them, seven men and two women. Mr. Keesing, the old fogey who teaches math, was mad at me for the longest time because I talked so much. After several warnings, he assigned me extra homework. An essay on the subject "A Chatterbox." A chatterbox, what can you write about that? I'd wbrry about that later, I decided. I jotted down the assignment in my notebook, tucked it in my bag and tried to keep quiet. 

That evening, after I'd finished the rest of my homework, the note about the essay caught my eye. I began thinking about the subject while chewing the tip of my fountain pen. Anyone could ramble on and leave big spaces between the words, but the trick was to come up with convincing arguments to prove the necessity of talking. I thought and thought, and suddenly I had an idea. I wrote the three pages Mr. Keesing had assigned me and was satisfied. I argued that talking is a female trait and that I would do my best to keep it under control, but that I would never be able to break myself of the habit, since my mother talked as much as I did, if not more, and that there's not much you can do about inherited traits. 

Mr. Keesing had a good laugh at my arguments, but when I proceeded to talk my way through the next class, he assigned me a second essay. This time it was supposed to be on "An Incorrigible Chatterbox." I handed it in, and Mr. Keesing had nothing to complain about for two whole classes. However, during the third class he'd finally had enough. "Anne Frank, as punishment for talking in class, write an essay entitled 'Quack, Quack, Quack,' said Mistress Chatterback.'" 

The class roared. I had to laugh too, though I'd ) nearly exhausted my ingenuity on the topic of chatterboxes. It was time to come up with something else, j something original. My friend Sanne, who's good at poetry, offered to help me write the essay from beginning to end in verse. I jumped for joy. Keesing was trying to play a joke on me with this ridiculous subject, but I'd make sure the joke was on him. I finished my poem, and it was beautiful! It was about a mother duck and a father swan with three baby ducklings who were bitten to death by the father because they quacked too much. Luckily, Keesing took the joke the right way. He read the poem to the class, adding his own comments, and to several other classes as well. Since then I've been allowed to talk and haven't been assigned any extra homework. On the contrary, Keesing's always i making jokes these days.
 
Yours, Anne 

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 24, 1942 

Dearest Kitty, 

It's sweltering. Everyone is huffing and puffing, and in this heat I have to walk everywhere. Only now do I realize how pleasant a streetcar is, but we Jews are no longer allowed to make use of this luxury; our own two feet are good enough for us. Yesterday at lunchtime I had an appointment with the dentist on Jan Luykenstraat. It's a long way from our school on Stadstimmertuinen. That afternoon I nearly fell asleep at my desk. Fortunately, people automatically offer you something to drink. The dental assistant is really kind. 

The only mode of transportation left to us is the ferry. The ferryman at Josef Israelkade took us across when we asked him to. It's not the fault of the Dutch that we Jews are having such a bad time.
 
I wish I didn't have to go to school. My bike was stolen during Easter vacation, and Father gave Mother's bike to some Christian friends for safekeeping. Thank goodness summer vacation is almost here; one more week and our torment will be over. 

Something unexpected happened yesterday morning. As I was passing the bicycle racks, I heard my name being called. I turned around and there was the nice boy I'd met the evening before at my friend Wilma's. He's Wilma's second cousin. I used to think Wilma was nice, which she is, but all she ever talks about is boys, and that gets to be a bore. He came toward me, somewhat shyly, and introduced himself as Hello Silberberg. I was a little surprised and wasn't sure what he wanted, but it didn't take me long to find out. He asked if I would allow him to accompany me to school. "As long as you're headed that way, I'll go with you," I said. And so we walked together. Hello is sixteen and good at telling all kinds of funny stories. 
 
He was waiting for me again this morning, and I expect he will be from now on. 

Anne 

WEDNESDAY, JULY 1, 1942 

Dearest Kitty, 

Until today I honestly couldn't find the time to write you. I was with friends all day Thursday, we had company on Friday, and that's how it went until today. 

Hello and I have gotten to know each other very well this past week, and he's told me a lot about his life. He comes from Gelsenkirchen and is living with his grandparents. His parents are in Belgium, but there's no way he can get there. Hello used to have a girlfriend named Ursula. I know her too. She's perfectly sweet and perfectly boring. Ever since he met me, Hello has realized that he's been falling asleep at Ursul's side. So I'm kind of a pep tonic. You never know what you're good for! 

Jacque spent Saturday night here. Sunday afternoon she was at Hanneli's, and I was bored stiff. 

Hello was supposed to come over that evening, but he called around six. I answered the phone, and he said, "This is Helmuth Silberberg. May I please speak to Anne?" 

"Oh, Hello. This is Anne." 

"Oh, hi, Anne. How are you?" " 

"Fine, thanks." 

"I just wanted to say I'm sorry but I can't come tonight, though I would like to have a word with you. Is it all right if I come by and pick you up in about ten minutes 

"Yes, that's fine. Bye-bye!" 

"Okay, I'll be right over. Bye-bye!" 

I hung up, quickly changed my clothes and fixed my hair. I was so nervous I leaned out the window to watch for him. He finally showed up. Miracle of miracles, I didn't rush down the stairs, but waited quietly until he rang the bell. I went down to open the door, and he got right to the point. 

"Anne, my grandmother thinks you're too young for me to be seeing you on a regular basis. She says I should be going to the Lowenbachs', but you probably know that I'm not going out with Ursul anymore." 

"No, I didn't know. What happened? Did you two have a fight?" 

"No, nothing like that. I told Ursul that we weren't suited to each other and so it was better for us not to go together anymore, but that she was welcome at my house and I hoped I would be welcome at hers. Actually, I thought Ursul was hanging around with another boy, and I treated her as if she were. But that wasn't true. And then my uncle said I should apologize to her, but of course I didn't feel like it, and that's why I broke up with her. But that was just one of the reasons. 

"Now my grandmother wants me to see Ursul and not you, but I don't agree and I'm not going to. Sometimes old people have really old-fashioned ideas, but that doesn't mean I have to go along with them. I need my grandparents, but in a certain sense they need me too. From now on I'll be free on Wednesday evenings. You see, my grandparents made me sign up for a wood-carving class, but actually I go to a club organized by the Zionists. My grandparents don't want me to go, because they're anti-Zionists. I'm not a fanatic Zionist, but it interests me. Anyway, it's been such a mess lately that I'm planning to quit. So next Wednesday will be my last meeting. That means I can see you Wednesday evening, Saturday afternoon, Saturday evening, Sunday afternoon and maybe even more." 

"But if your grandparents don't want you to, you? shouldn't go behind their backs." 

"All's fair in love and war."

Just then we passed Blankevoort's Bookstore and there was Peter Schiff with two other boys; it was the first time he'd said hello to me in ages, and it really made me feel good. 

Monday evening Hello came over to meet Father and Mother. I had bought a cake and some candy, and we had tea and cookies, the works, but neither Hello nor I felt like sitting stiffly on our chairs. So we went out for a walk, and he didn't deliver me to my door until ten past eight. Father was furious. He said it was very wrong of me not to get home on time. I had to promise to be home by ten to eight in the future. I've been asked to Hello's on Saturday. 

Wilma told me that one night when Hello was at her house, she asked him, "Who do you like best, Ursul or Anne?" 

He said, "It's none of your business." 

But as he was leaving (they hadn't talked to each other the rest of the evening), he said, "Well, I like Anne better, but don't tell anyone. Bye!" And whoosh. . . he was out the door. 

In everything he says or does, I can see that Hello is in love with me, and it's kind of nice for a change. Margot would say that Hello is eminently suitable. I think so too, but he's more than that. Mother is also full of praise: "A good-looking boy. Nice and polite." I'm glad he's so popular with everyone. Except with my girlfriends. He thinks they're very childish, and he's right about that. Jacque still teases me about him, but I'm not in love with him. Not really. It's all right for me to have boys as friends. Nobody minds. 

Mother is always asking me who I'm going to marry when I grow up, but I bet she'll never guess it's Peter, because I talked her out of that idea myself, without batting an eyelash. I love Peter as I've never loved anyone, and I tell myself he's only going around with all those other girls to hide his feelings for me. Maybe he thinks Hello and I are in love with each other, which we're not. He's just a friend, or as Mother puts it, a beau. 

Yours, Anne 

SUNDAY, JULY 5, 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

The graduation ceremony in the Jewish Theater on Friday went as expected. My report card wasn't too bad. I got one D, a C- in algebra and all the rest B's, except for two B+'s and two B-'s. My parents are pleased, but they're not like other parents when it comes to grades. They never worry about report cards, good or bad. As long as I'm healthy and happy and don't talk back too much, they're satisfied. If these three things are all right, everything else will take care of itself. 

I'm just the opposite. I don't want to be a poor student. I was accepted to the Jewish Lyceum on a conditional basis. I was supposed to stay in the seventh grade at the Montessori School, but when Jewish children were required to go to Jewish schools, Mr. Elte finally agreed, after a great deal of persuasion, to accept Lies Goslar and me. Lies also passed this year, though she has to repeat her geometry exam. 

Poor Lies. It isn't easy for her to study at home; her baby sister, a spoiled little two-year-old, plays in her room all day. If Gabi doesn't get her way, she starts screaming, and if Lies doesn't look after her, Mrs. Goslar starts screaming. So Lies has a hard time doing her homework, and as long as that's the case, the tutoring she's been getting won't help much. The Goslar household is really a sight. Mrs. Goslar's parents live next door, but eat with the family. The there's a hired girl, the baby, the always absentminded and absent Mr. Goslar and the always nervous and irrita Ie Mrs. Goslar, who's expecting another baby. Lies, who's all thumbs, gets lost in the mayhem. 

My sister Margot has also gotten her report card. 

Brilliant, as usual. If we had such a thing as "cum laude," she would have passed with honors, she's so smart. 

Father has been home a lot lately. There's nothing for him to do at the office; it must be awful to feel you're not needed. Mr. Kleiman has taken over Opekta, and Mr. Kugler, Gies & Co., the company dealing in spices and spice substitutes that was set up in 1941. 

A few days ago, as we were taking a stroll around our neighborhood square, Father began to talk about going into hiding. He said it would be very hard for us to live cut off from the rest of the world. I asked him why he was bringing this up now. 

"Well, Anne," he replied, "you know that for more than a year we've been bringing clothes, food and furniture to other people. We don't want our belongings to be seized by the Germans. Nor do we want to fall into their clutches ourselves. So we'll leave of our own accord and not wait to be hauled away." 

"But when, Father?" He sounded so serious that I felt scared. 

"Don't you worry. We'll take care of everything. just enjoy your carefree life while you can." 

That was it. Oh, may these somber words not come true for as long as possible. 

The doorbell's ringing, Hello's here, time to stop. 

Yours, Anne 

WEDNESDAY, JULY 8, 1942 

Dearest Kitty, 

It seems like years since Sunday morning. So much has happened it's as if the whole world had suddenly turned upside down. But as you can see, Kitty, I'm still alive, and that's the main thing, Father says. I'm alive all right, but don't ask where or how. You probably don't understand a word I'm saying today, so I'll begin by telling you what happened Sunday afternoon. 

At three o'clock (Hello had left but was supposed to come back later), the doorbell rang. I didn't hear it, since I was out on the balcony, lazily reading in the sun. A little while later Margot appeared in the kitchen doorway looking very agitated. "Father has received a call-up notice from the SS," she whispered. "Mother has gone to see Mr. van Daan" (Mr. van Daan is Father's business partner and a good friend.) 

I was stunned. A call-up: everyone knows what that means. Visions of concentration camps and lonely cells raced through my head. How could we let Father go to such a fate? "Of course he's not going," declared Margot as we waited for Mother in the living room. "Mother's gone to Mr. van Daan to ask whether we can move to our hiding place tomorrow. The van Daans are going with us. There will be seven of us altogether." Silence. We couldn't speak. The thought of Father off visiting someone in the Jewish Hospital and completely unaware of what was happening, the long wait for Mother, the heat, the suspense -- all this reduced us to silence. 

Suddenly the doorbell rang again. "That's Hello," I said. 

"Don't open the door!" exclaimed Margot to stop me. But it wasn't necessary, since we heard Mother and Mr. van Daan downstairs talking to Hello, and then the two of them came inside and shut the door behind them. Every time the bell rang, either Margot or I had to tiptoe downstairs to see if it was Father, and we didn't let anyone else in. Margot and I were sent from the room, as Mr. van Daan wanted to talk to Mother alone. 

When she and I were sitting in our bedroom, Margot told me that the call-up was not for Father, but for her. At this second shock, I began to cry. Margot is sixteen -- apparently they want to send girls her age away on their own. But thank goodness she won't be going; Mother had said so herself, which must be what Father had meant when he talked to me about our going into hiding. Hiding. . . where would we hide? In the city? In the country? In a house? In a shack? When, where, how. . . ? These were questions I wasn't allowed to ask, but they still kept running through my mind. 

Margot and I started packing our most important belongings into a schoolbag. The first thing I stuck in was this diary, and then curlers, handkerchiefs, schoolbooks, a comb and some old letters. Preoccupied by the thought of going into hiding, I stuck the craziest things in the bag, but I'm not sorry. Memories mean more to me than dresses. 

Father finally came hQme around five o'clock, and we called Mr. Kleiman to ask if he could come by that evening. Mr. van Daan left and went to get Miep. Miep arrived and promised to return later that night, taking with her a bag full of shoes, dresses, jackets, underwear and stockings. After that it was quiet in our apartment; none of us felt like eating. It was still hot, and everything was very strange. 

We had rented our big upstairs room to a Mr. Goldschmidt, a divorced man in his thirties, who apparently had nothing to do that evening, since despite all our polite hints he hung around until ten o'clock. 

Miep and Jan Gies came at eleven. Miep, who's worked for Father's company since 1933, has become a close friend, and so has her husband Jan. Once again, shoes, stockings, books and underwear disappeared into Miep's bag and Jan's deep pockets. At eleven-thirty they too disappeared. 

I was exhausted, and even though I knew it'd be my last night in my own bed, I fell asleep right away and didn't wake up until Mother called me at five-thirty the next morning. Fortunately, it wasn't as hot as Sunday; a warm rain fell throughout the day. The four of us were wrapped in so many layers of clothes it looked as if we were going off to spend the night in a refrigerator, and all that just so we could take more clothes with us. No Jew in our situation would dare leave the house with a suitcase full of clothes. I was wearing two undershirts, three pairs of underpants, a dress, and over that a skirt, a jacket, a raincoat, two pairs of stockings, heavy shoes, a cap, a scarf and lots more. I was suffocating even before we left the house, but no one bothered to ask me how I felt. 

Margot stuffed her schoolbag with schoolbooks, went to get her bicycle and, with Miep leading the way, rode off into the great unknown. At any rate, that's how I thought of it, since I still didn't know where our hiding place was. 

At seven-thirty we too closed the door behind us; Moortje, my cat, was the only living creature I said good-bye to. According to a note we left for Mr. Goldschmidt, she was to be taken to the neighbors, who would give her a good home. 

The stripped beds, the breakfast things on the table, the pound of meat for the cat in the kitchen -- all of these created the impression that we'd left in a hurry. But we weren't interested in impressions. We just wanted to get out of there, to get away and reach our destination in safety. Nothing else mattered. 

More tomorrow. 

Yours, Anne 

THURSDAY, JULY 9, 1942 

Dearest Kitty, 

So there we were, Father, Mother and I, walking in the pouring rain, each of us with a schoolbag and a shopping bag filled to the brim with the most varied assortment of items. The people on their way to work at that early hour gave us sympathetic looks; you could tell by their faces that they were sorry they couldn't offer us some kind of transportation; the conspicuous yellow star spoke for itself.
 
Only when we were walking down the street did Father and Mother reveal, little by little, what the plan was. For months we'd been moving as much of our furniture and apparel out of the apartment as we could. It was agreed that we'd go into hiding on July 16. Because of Margot's call-up notice, the plan had to be moved up ten days, which meant we'd have to make do with less orderly rooms.
 
The hiding place was located in Father's office building. That's a little hard for outsiders to understand, so I'll explain. Father didn't have a lot of people working in his office, just Mr. Kugler, Mr. Kleiman, Miep and a twenty-three-year-old typist named Bep Voskuijl, all of whom were informed of our coming. Mr. Voskuijl, Bep's father, works in the warehouse, along with two assistants, none of whom were told anything. 

Here's a description of the building. The large warehouse on the ground floor is used as a workroom and storeroom and is divided into several different sections, such as the stockroom and the milling room, where cinnamon, cloves and a pepper substitute are ground. 

Next to the warehouse doors is another outside' door, a separate entrance to the office. Just inside the office door is a second door, and beyond that a stairway. At the top of the stairs is another door, with a frosted window on which the word "Office" is written in black letters. This is the big front office -- very large, very light and very full. Bep, Miep and Mr. Kleiman work there during the day. After passing through an alcove containing a safe, a wardrobe and a big supply cupboard, you come to the small, dark, stuffy back office. This used to be shared by Mr. Kugler and Mr. van Daan, but now Mr. Kugler is its only occupant. Mr. Kugler's office can also be reached from the hallway, but only through a glass door that can be opened from the inside but not easily from the outside. If you leave Mr. Kugler's office and proceed through the long, narrow hallway past the coal bin and go up four steps, you find yourself in the private office, the showpiece of the entire building. Elegant mahogany furniture, a linoleum floor covered with throw rugs, a radio, a fancy lamp, everything first class. Next door is a spacious kitchen with a hot-water heater and two gas burners, and beside that a bathroom. That's the second floor. 

A wooden staircase leads from the downstairs hallway to the third floor. At the top of the stairs is a landing, with doors on either side. The door on the left takes you up to the spice storage area, attic and loft in the front part of the house. A typically Dutch, very steep, ankle-twisting flight of stairs also runs from the front part of the house to another door opening onto the street. 

The door to the right of the landing leads to the "Secret Annex" at the back ofthe house. No one would ever suspect there were so many rooms behind that plain gray door. There's just one small step in front of the door, and then you're inside. Straight ahead of you is a steep flight of stairs. To the left is a narrow hallway opening onto a room that serves as the Frank family's living 

[INSERT MAP HERE]

room and bedroom. Next door is a smaller room, the )edroom and study of the two young ladies of the family. ro the right of the stairs is a windowless washroom. with a link. The door in the corner leads to the toilet and another one to Margot's and my room. If you go up the itairs and open the door at the top, you're surprised to see such a large, light and spacious room in an old canalside house like this. It contains a stove (thanks to the fact hat it used to be Mr. Kugler's laboratory) and a sink. 

This will be the kitchen and bedroom of Mr. and Mrs. van Daan, as well as the general living room, dining room and study for us all. A tiny side room is to be Peter van Daan's bedroom. Then, just as in the front part of the building, there's an attic and a loft. So there you are. Now I've introduced you to the whole of our lovely Annex! 

Yours, Anne 

FRIDAY, JULY 10, 1942 

Dearest Kitty, I've probably bored you with my long description of our house, but I still think you should know where I've ended up; how I ended up here is something you'll figure out from my next letters. 

But first, let me continue my story, because, as you know, I wasn't finished. After we arrived at 263 Prinsengracht, Miep quickly led us through the long hallway and up the wooden staircase to the next floor and into the Annex. She shut the door behind us, leaving us alone. Margot had arrived much earlier on her bike and was waiting for us. 

Our living room and all the other rooms were so full of stuff that I can't find the words to describe it. All the cardboard boxes that had been sent to the office in the last few months were piled on the floors and beds. The small room was filled from floor to cethng with linens. If we wanted to sleep in properly made beds that night, we had to get going and straighten up the mess. Mother and Margot were unable to move a muscle. They lay down on their bare mattresses, tired, miserable and I don't know what else. But Father and I, the two cleaner-uppers in the family, started in right away. 

All day long we unpacked boxes, filled cupboards, hammered nails and straightened up the mess, until we fell exhausted into our clean beds at night. We hadn't eaten a hot meal all day, but we didn't care; Mother and Margot were too tired and keyed up to eat, and Father and I were too busy. 

Tuesday morning we started where we left off the night before. Bep and Miep went grocery shopping with our ration coupons, Father worked on our blackout screens, we scrubbed the kitchen floor, and were once again busy from sunup to sundown. Until Wednesday, I didn't have a chance to think about the enormous change in my life. Then for the first time since our arrival in the Secret Annex, I found a moment to tell you all about it and to realize what had happened to me and what was yet to happen. 

Yours, Anne 

SATURDAY, JULY 11, 1942 

Dearest Kitty, 

Father, Mother and Margot still can't get used to the chiming of the Westertoren clock, which tells us the time every quarter of an hour. Not me, I liked it from the start; it sounds so reassuring, especially at night. You no doubt want to hear what I think of being in hiding. Well, all I can say is that I don't really know yet. I don't think I'll ever feel at home in this house, but that doesn't mean I hate it. It's more like being on vacation in some strange pension. Kind of an odd way to look at life in hiding, but that's how things are. The Annex is an ideal place to hide in. It may be damp and lopsided, but there's probably not a more comfortable hiding place in all of Amsterdam. No, in all of Holland. 

Up to now our bedroom, with its blank walls, was very bare. Thanks to Father -- who brought my entire postcard and movie-star collection here beforehand -- and to a brush and a pot of glue, I was able to plaster the walls with pictures. It looks much more cheerful. When the van Daans arrive, we'll be able to build cupboards and other odds and ends out of the wood piled in the attic. 

Margot and Mother have recovered somewhat. Yesterday Mother felt well enough to cook split-pea soup for the first time, but then she was downstairstalking and forgot all about it. The beans were scorched black, and no amount of scraping could get them out of the pan. 

Last night the four of us went down to the private office and listened to England on the radio. I was so scared someone might hear it that I literally begged Father to take me back upstairs. Mother understood my anxiety and went with me. Whatever we do, we're very afraid the neighbors might hear or see us. We started off immediately the first day sewing curtains. Actually, you can hardly call them that, since they're nothing but scraps of fabric, varying greatly in shape, quality and pattern, which Father and I stitched crookedly together with unskilled fingers. These works of art were tacked to the windows, where they'll stay until we come out of hiding. 

The building on our right is a branch of the Keg Company, a firm from Zaandam, and on the left is a furniture workshop. Though the people who work there are not on the premises after hours, any sound we make might travel through the walls. We've forbidden Margot to cough at night, even though she has a bad cold, and are giving her large doses of codeine. 

I'm looking forward to the arrival of the van Daans, which is set for Tuesday. It will be much more fun and also not as quiet. You see, it's the silence that makes me so nervous during the evenings and nights, and I'd give anything to have one of our helpers sleep here.

It's really not that bad here, since we can do our own cooking and can listen to the radio in Daddy's office.

Mr. Kleiman and Miep, and Bep Voskuijl too, have helped us so much. We've already canned loads of rhubarb, strawberries and cherries, so for the time being I doubt we'll be bored. We also have a supply of reading material, and we're going to buy lots of games. Of course, we can't ever look out the window or go outside. And we have to be quiet so the people downstairs can't hear us.

Yesterday we had our hands full. We had to pit two crates of cherries for Mr. Kugler to can. We're going to use the empty crates to make bookshelves.

Someone's calling me.

Yours, Anne

COMMENT ADDED BY ANNE ON SEPTEMBER 2g, 1942: Not beina able to ao outside upsets me more than I can say, and I'm terrified our hidina place will be discovered and that we'll be shot. That, of course, is a fairly dismal prospect.

SUNDAY, JULY 12, 1942

They've all been so nice to me this last month because of my birthday, and yet every day I feel myself drifting further away from Mother and Margot. I worked hard today and they praised me, only to start picking on me again five minutes later.

You can easily see the difference between the way they deal with Margot and the way they deal with me. For example, Margot broke the vacuum cleaner, and because of that we've been without light for the rest of the day. Mother said, "Well, Margot, it's easy to see you're not used to working; otherwise, you'd have known better than to yank the plug out by the cord." Margot made some reply, and that was the end of the story.

But this afternoon, when I wanted to rewrite something on Mother's shopping list because her handwriting is so hard to read, she wouldn't let me. She bawled me out again, and the whole family wound up getting involved.

I don't fit in with them, and I've felt that clearly in the last few weeks. They're so sentimental together, but I'd rather be sentimental on my own. They're always saying how nice it is with the four of us, and that we get along so well, without giving a moment's thought to the fact that I don't feel that way.

Daddy's the only one who understands me, now and again, though he usually sides with Mother and Margot. Another thing I can't stand is having them talk about me in front of outsiders, telling them how I cried or how sensibly I'm behaving. It's horrible. And sometimes they talk about Moortje and I can't take that at all. Moortje is my weak spot. I miss her every minute of the day, and no one knows how often I think of her; whenever I do, my eyes fill with tears. Moortje is so sweet, and I love her so much that I keep dreaming she'll come back to us.

I have plenty of dreams, but the reality is that we'll have to stay here until the war is over. We can't ever go outside, and the only visitors we can have are Miep, her husband Jan, Bep Voskuijl, Mr. Voskuijl, Mr. Kugler, Mr. Kleiman and Mrs. Kleiman, though she hasn't come because she thinks it's too dangerous.

COMMENT ADDED BY ANNE IN SEPTEMBER 1942: Daddy's always so nice. He understands me perfectly, and I wish we could have a heart-to-heart talk sometime without my bursting instantly into tears. But apparently that has to do with my age. I'd like to spend all my time writing, but that would probably get boring.

Up to now I've only confided my thoughts to my diary. I still haven't gotten around to writing amusing sketches that I could read aloud at a later date. In the future I'm going to devote less time to sentimentality and more time to reality.

FRIDAY, AUGUST 14, 1942

Dear Kitty,

I've deserted you for an entire month, but so little has happened that I can't find a newsworthy item to relate every single day. The van Daans arrived on July 13. We thought they were coming on the fourteenth, but from the thirteenth to sixteenth the Germans were sending out call-up notices right and left and causing a lot of unrest, so they decided it would be safer to leave a day too early than a day too late.

Peter van Daan arrived at nine-thirty in the morning (while we were still at breakfast). Peter's going on sixteen, a shy, awkward boy whose company won't amount to much. Mr. and Mrs. van Daan came half an hour later.

Much to our amusement, Mrs. van Daan was carrying a hatbox with a large chamber pot inside. "I just don't feel at home without my chamber pot," she exclaimed, and it was the first item to find a permanent place under the divan. Instead of a chamber pot, Mr. van D. was lugging a collapsible tea table under his arm.

From the first, we ate our meals together, and after three days it felt as if the seven of us had become one big family. Naturally, the van Daans had much to tell about the week we'd been away from civilization. We were especially interested in what had happened to our apartment and to Mr. Goldschmidt.

Mr. van Daan filled us in: "Monday morning at nine, Mr. Goldschmidt phoned and asked if I could come over. I went straightaway and found a very distraught Mr. Goldschmidt. He showed me a note that the Frank family had left behind. As instructed, he was planning to bring the cat to the neighbors, which I agreed was a good idea. He was afraid the house was going to be searched, so we w=nt through all the rooms, straightening up here and there and clearing the breakfast things off the table. Suddenly I saw a notepad on Mrs. Frank's desk, with an address in Maastricht written on it. Even though I knew Mrs. Frank had left it on purpose, I pretended to be surprised and horrified and begged Mr. Goldschmidt to burn this incriminating piece of paper. I swore up and down that I knew nothing about your disappearance, but that the note had given me an idea. 'Mr. Goldschmidt,' I said, 'I bet I know what this address refers to. About six months ago a high-ranking officer came to the office. It seems he and Mr. Frank grew up together. He promised to help Mr. Frank if it was ever necessary. As I recall, he was stationed in Maastricht. I think this officer has kept his word and is somehow planning to help them cross over to Belgium and then to Switzerland. There's no harm in telling this to any friends of the Franks who come asking about them. Of course, you don't need to mention the part about Maastricht.' And after that I left. This is the story most of your friends have been told, because I heard it later from several other people."

We thought it was extremely funny, but we laughed even harder when Mr. van Daan told us that certain people have vivid imaginations. For example, one family living on our square claimed they sawall four of us riding by on our bikes early in the morning, and another woman was absolutely positive we'd been loaded into some kind of military vehicle in the middle of the night.

Yours, Anne

FRIDAY, AUGUST 21, 1942

Dear Kitty,

Now our Secret Annex has truly become secret.

Because so many houses are being searched for hidden bicycles, Mr. Kugler thought it would be better to have a bookcase built in front of the entrance to our hiding place. It swings out on its hinges and opens like a door. Mr. Voskuijl did the carpentry work. (Mr. Voskuijl has been told that the seven of us are in hiding, and he's been most helpful.)

Now whenever we want to go downstairs we have to duck and then jump. After the first three days we were all walking around with bumps on our foreheads from banging our heads against the low doorway. Then Peter cushioned it by nailing a towel stuffed with wood shavings to the doorframe. Let's see if it helps!

I'm not doing much schoolwork. I've given myself a vacation until September. Father wants to start tutoring me then, but we have to buy all the books first.

There's little change in our lives here. Peter's hair was washed today, but that's nothing special. Mr. van Daan and I are always at loggerheads with each other. Mama always treats me like a baby, which I can't stand. For the rest, things are going better. I don't think Peter's gotten any nicer. He's an obnoxious boy who lies around on his bed all day, only rousing himself to do a little carpentry work before returning to his nap. What a dope!

Mama gave me another one of her dreadful sermons this morning. We take the opposite view of everything. Daddy's a sweetheart; he may get mad at me, but it never lasts longer than five minutes.

It's a beautiful day outside, nice and hot, and in spite of everything, we make the most of the weather by lounging on the folding bed in the attic.

Yours, Anne

COMMENT ADDED BY ANNE ON SEPTEMBER 21, 1942: Mr. van Daan has been as nice as pie to me recently. I've said nothina, but have been enjoyina it while it lasts.

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 2, 1942

Dearest Kitty,

Mr. and Mrs. van Daan have had a terrible fight. I've never seen anything like it, since Mother and Father wouldn't dream of shouting at each other like that. The argument was based on something so trivial it didn't seem worth wasting a single word on it. Oh well, to each his own.

Of course, it's very difficult for Peter, who gets caught in the middle, but no one takes Peter seriously anymore, since he's hypersensitive and lazy. Yesterday he was beside himself with worry because his tongue was blue instead of pink. This rare phenomenon disappeared as quickly as it came. Today he's walking around with a heavy scarf on because he's got a stiff neck. His Highness has been complaining of lumbago too. Aches and pains in his heart, kidneys and lungs are also par for the course. He's an absolute hypochondriac! (That's the right word, isn't it?)

Mother and Mrs. van Daan aren't getting along very well. There are enough reasons for the friction. To give you one small example, Mrs. van D. has removed all but three of her sheets from our communal linen closet. She's assuming that Mother's can be used for both families. She'll be in for a nasty surprise when she discovers that Mother has followed her lead.

Furthermore, Mrs. van D. is ticked off because we're using her china instead of ours. She's still trying to find out what we've done with our plates; they're a lot closer than she thinks, since they're packed in cardboard boxes in the attic, behind a load of Opekta advertising material. As long as we're in hiding, the plates will remain out of her reach. Since I'm always having accidents, it's just as well! Yesterday I broke one of Mrs. van D.'s soup bowls.

"Oh!" she angrily exclaimed. "Can't you be more careful? That was my last one."

Please bear in mind, Kitty, that the two ladies speak abominable Dutch (I don't dare comment on the gentlemen: they'd be highly insulted). If you were to hear their bungled attempts, you'd laugh your head off. We've given up pointing out their errors, since correcting them doesn't help anyway. Whenever I quote Mother or Mrs. van Daan, I'll write proper Dutch instead of trying to duplicate their speech.

Last week there was a brief interruption in our monotonous routine. This was provided by Peter -- and a book about women. I should explain that Margot and Peter are allowed to read nearly all the books Mr. Kleiman lends us. But the adults preferred to keep this special book to themselves. This immediately piqued Peter's curiosity. What forbidden fruit did it contain? He snuck off with it when his mother was downstairs talking, and took himself and his booty to the loft. For two days all was well. Mrs. van Daan knew what he was up to, but kept mum until Mr. van Daan found out about it. He threw a fit, took the book away and assumed that would be the end of the business. However, he'd neglected to take his son's curiosity into account. Peter, not in the least fazed by his father's swift action, began thinking up ways to read the rest of this vastly interesting book.

In the meantime, Mrs. van D. asked Mother for her opinion. Mother didn't think this particular book was suitable for Margot, but she saw no harm in letting her read most other books.

You see, Mrs. van Daan, Mother Said, there's a big difference between Margot and Peter. To begin with, Margot's a girl, and girls are always more mature than boys. Second, she's already read many serious books and doesn't go looking for those which are no longer forbidden. Third, Margot's much more sensible and intellectually advanced, as a result of her four years at an excellent school."

Mrs. van Daan agreed with her, but felt it was wrong as a matter of principle to let youngsters read books written for adults.

Meanwhile, Peter had thought of a suitable time when no one would be interested in either him or the book. At seven-thirty in the evening, when the entire family was listening to the radio in the private office, he took his treasure and stole off to the loft again. He should have been back by eight-thirty, but he was so engrossed in the book that he forgot the time and was just coming down the stairs when his father entered the room. The scene that followed was not surprising: after a slap, a whack and a tug-of-war, the book lay on the table and Peter was in the loft.

This is how matters stood when it was time for the family to eat. Peter stayed upstairs. No one gave him a moment's thought; he'd have to go to bed without his dinner. We continued eating, chatting merrily away, when suddenly we heard a piercing whistle. We lay down our forks and stared at each other, the shock clearly visible on our pale faces.

Then we heard Peter's voice through the chimney: "I won t come down!"

Mr. van Daan leapt up, his napkin falling to the floor, and shouted, with the blood rushing to his face, "I've had enough!"

Father, afraid of what might happen, grabbed him by the arm and the two men went to the attic. After much struggling and kicking, Peter wound up in his room with the door shut, and we went on eating.

Mrs. van Daan wanted to save a piece of bread for her darling son, but Mr. van D. was adamant. "If he doesn't apologize this minute, he'll have to sleep in the loft."

We protested that going without dinner was enough punishment. What if Peter were to catch cold? We wouldn't be able to call a doctor.

Peter didn't apologize, and returned to the loft.

Mr. van Daan decided to leave well enough alone, though he did note the next morning that Peter's bed had been slept in. At seven Peter went to the attic again, but was persuaded to come downstairs when Father spoke a few friendly words to him. After three days of sullen looks and stubborn silence, everything was back to normal.

Yours, Anne

MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 21, 1942

Dearest Kitty,

Today I'll tell you the general news here in the Annex. A lamp has been mounted above my divan bed so that in the future, when I hear the guns going off, I'll be able to pull a cord and switch on the light. I can't use it at the moment because we're keeping our window open a little, day and night.

The male members of the van Daan contingent have built a very handy wood-stained food safe, with real screens. Up to now this glorious cupboard has been located in Peter's room, but in the interests of fresh air it's been moved to the attic. Where it once stood, there's now a shelf. I advised Peter to put his table underneath the shelf, add a nice rug and hang his own cupboard where the table now stands. That might make his little cubbyhole more comfy, though I certainly wouldn't like to sleep there.

Mrs. van Daan is unbearable. I'm continually being scolded for my incessant chatter when I'm upstairs. I simply let the words bounce right off me! Madame now has a new trick up her sleeve: trying to get out of washing the pots and pans. If there's a bit of food left at the bottom of the pan, she leaves it to spoil instead of transferring it to a glass dish. Then in the afternoon when Margot is stuck with cleaning all the pots and pans, Madame exclaims, "Oh, poor Margot, you have so much work to do!"

Every other week Mr. Kleiman brings me a couple of books written for girls my age. I'm enthusiastic about the loop ter Heul series. I've enjoyed all of Cissy van Marxveldt's books very much. I've read The Zaniest Summer four times, and the ludicrous situations still make me laugh.

Father and I are currently working on our family tree, and he tells me something about each person as we go along. I've begun my schoolwork. I'm working hard at French, cramming five irregular verbs into my head every day. But I've forgotten much too much of what I learned in school.

Peter has taken up his English with great reluctance. A few schoolbooks have just arrived, and I brought a large supply of notebooks, pencils, erasers and labels from home. Pim (that's our pet name for Father) wants me to help him with his Dutch lessons. I'm perfectly willing to tutor him in exchange for his assistance with French and other subjects. But he makes the most unbelievable mistakes!

I sometimes listen to the Dutch broadcasts from London. Prince Bernhard recently announced that Princess juliana is expecting a baby in January, which I think is wonderful. No one here understands why I take such an interest in the Royal Family.

A few nights ago I was the topic of discussion, and we all decided I was an ignoramus. As a result, I threw myself into my schoolwork the next day, since I have little desire to still be a freshman when I'm fourteen or fifteen. The fact that I'm hardly allowed to read anything was also discussed. At the moment, Mother's reading Gentlemen, Wives and Servants, and of course I'm not allowed to read it (though Margot is!). First I have to be more intellectually developed, like my genius of a sister. Then we discussed my ignorance of philosophy, psychology and physiology (I immediately looked up these big words in the dictionary!). It's true, I don't know anything about these subjects. But maybe I'll be smarter next year!

I've come to the shocking conclusion that I have only one long-sleeved dress and three cardigans to wear in the winter. Father's given me permission to knit a white wool sweater; the yarn isn't very pretty, but it'll be warm, and that's what counts. Some of our clothing was left with friends, but unfortunately we won't be able to get to it until after the war. Provided it's still there, of course.

I'd just finished writing something about Mrs. van Daan when she walked into the room. Thump, I slammed the book shut.

"Hey, Anne, can't I even take a peek?"

"No, Mrs. van Daan."

"Just the last page then?"

"No, not even the last page, Mrs. van Daan."

Of course, I nearly died, since that particular page contained a rather unflattering description of her.

There's something happening every day, but I'm too tired and lazy to write it all down.

Yours, Anne

FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 25, 1942

Dearest Kitty,

Father has a friend, a man in his mid-seventies named Mr. Dreher, who's sick, poor and deaf as a post. At his side, like a useless appendage, is his wife, twenty-seven years younger and equally poor, whose arms and legs are loaded with real and fake bracelets and rings left over from more prosperous days. This Mr. Dreher has already been a great nuisance to Father, and I've always admired the saintly patience with which he handled this pathetic old man on the phone. When we were still living at home, Mother used to advise him to put a gramophone in front of the receiver, one that would repeat every three minutes, "Yes, Mr. Dreher" and "No, Mr. Dreher," since the old man never understood a word of Father's lengthy replies anyway.

Today Mr. Dreher phoned the office and asked Mr. Kugler to come and see him. Mr. Kugler wasn't in the mood and said he would send Miep, but Miep canceled the appointment. Mrs. Dreher called the office three times, but since Miep was reportedly out the entire afternoon, she had to imitate Bep's voice. Downstairs in the office as well as upstairs in the Annex, there was great hilarity. Now each time the phone rings, Bep says' 'That's Mrs. Dreher!" and Miep has to laugh, so that the people on the other end of the line are greeted with an impolite giggle. Can't you just picture it? This has got to be the greatest office in the whole wide world. The bosses and the office girls have such fun together!

Some evenings I go to the van Daans for a little chat. We eat "mothball cookies" (molasses cookies that were stored in a closet that was mothproofed) and have a good time. Recently the conversation was about Peter. I said that he often pats me on the cheek, which I don't like. They asked me in a typically grown-up way whether I could ever learn to love Peter like a brother, since he loves me like a sister. "Oh, no!" I said, but what I was thinking was, "Oh, ugh!" Just imagine! I added that Peter's a bit stiff, perhaps because he's shy. Boys who aren't used to being around girls are like that.

I must say that the Annex Committee (the men's section) is very creative. Listen to the scheme they've come up with to get a message to Mr. Broks, an Opekta Co. sales representative and friend who's surreptitiously hidden some of our things for us! They're going to type a letter to a store owner in southern Zealand who is, indirectly, one of Opekta' s customers and ask him to fill out a form and send it back in the enclosed self-addressed envelope. Father will write the address on the envelope himself. Once the letter is returned from Zealand, the form can be removed and a handwritten message confirming that Father is alive can be inserted in the envelope. This way Mr. Broks can read the letter without suspecting a ruse. They chose the province of Zealand because it's close to Belgium (a letter can easily be smuggled across the border) and because no one is allowed to travel there without a special permit. An ordinary salesman like Mr. Broks would never be granted a permit.

Yesterday Father put on another act. Groggy with sleep, he stumbled off to bed. His feet were cold, so I lent him my bed socks. Five minutes later he flung them to the floor. Then he pulled the blankets over his head because the light bothered him. The lamp was switched off, and he gingerly poked his head out from under the covers. It was all very amusing. We started talking about the fact that Peter says Margot is a "buttinsky." Suddenly Daddy's voice was heard from the depths: "Sits on her butt, you mean.

Mouschi, the cat, is becoming nicer to me as time goes by, but I'm still somewhat afraid of her.

Yours, Anne

SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 27, 1942

Dearest Kitty,

Mother and I had a so-called "discussion" today, but the annoying part is that I burst into tears. I can't help it. Daddy is always nice to me, and he also understands me much better. At moments like these I can't stand Mother. It's obvious that I'm a stranger to her; she doesn't even know what I think about the most ordinary things.

We were talking about maids and the fact that you're supposed to refer to them as "domestic help" these days. She claimed that when the war is over, that's what they'll want to be called. I didn't quite see it that way. Then she added that I talk about' 'later" so often and that I act as if I were such a lady, even though I'm not, but I don't think building sand castles in the air is such a terrible thing to do, as long as you don't take it too seriously. At any rate, Daddy usually comes to my defense. Without him I wouldn't be able to stick it out here.

I don't get along with Margot very well either. Even though our family never has the same kind of outbursts they have upstairs, I find it far from pleasant. Margot's and Mother's personalities are so alien to me. I understand my girlfriends better than my own mother. Isn't that a shame?

For the umpteenth time, Mrs. van Daan is sulking. She's very moody and has been removing more and more of her belongings and locking them up. It's too bad Mother doesn't repay every van Daan "disappearing act" with a Frank "disappearing act."

Some people, like the van Daans, seem to take special delight not only in raising their own children but in helping others raise theirs. Margot doesn't need it, since she's naturally good, kind and clever, perfection itself, but I seem to have enough mischief for the two of us. More than once the air has been filled with the van Daans' admonitions and my saucy replies. Father and Mother always defend me fiercely. Without them I wouldn't be able to jump back into the fray with my usual composure. They keep telling me I should talk less, mind my own business and be more modest, but I seem doomed to failure. If Father weren't so patient, I'd have long ago given up hope of ever meeting my parents' quite moderate expectations.

If I take a small helping of a vegetable I loathe and eat potatoes instead, the van Daans, especially Mrs. van Daan, can't get over how spoiled I am. "Come on, Anne, eat some more vegetables," she says.

"No, thank you, ma'am," I reply. "The potatoes are more than enough."

"Vegetables are good for you; your mother says so too. Have some more," she insists, until Father intervenes and upholds my right to refuse a dish I don't like.

Then Mrs. van D. really flies off the handle: "You should have been at our house, where children were brought up the way they should be. I don't call this a proper upbringing. Anne is terribly spoiled. I'd never allow that. If Anne were my daughter. . ."

This is always how her tirades begin and end: "If Anne were my daughter. . ." Thank goodness I'm not.

But to get back to the subject of raising children, yesterday a silence fell after Mrs. van D. finished her little speech. Father then replied, "I think Anne is very well brought up. At least she's learned not to respond to your interminable sermons. As far as the vegetables are concerned, all I have to say is look who's calling the kettle black."
 
Mrs. van D. was soundly defeated. The pot calling the ketde black refers of course to Madame herself, since she can't tolerate beans or any kind of cabbage in the evening because they give her "gas." But I could say the same. What a dope, don't you think? In any case, let's hope she stops talking about me.

It's so funny to see how quickly Mrs. van Daan flushes. I don't, and it secredy annoys her no end.

Yours, Anne

MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 28,1942

Dearest Kitty,

I had to stop yesterday, though I was nowhere near finished. I'm dying to tell you about another one of our clashes, but before I do I'd like to say this: I think it's odd that grown-ups quarrel so easily and so often and about such petty matters. Up to now I always thought bickering was just something children did and that they outgrew it. Often, of course, there's sometimes a reason to have a real quarrel, but the verbal exchanges that take place here are just plain bickering. I should be used to the fact that these squabbles are daily occurrences, but I'm not and never will be as long as I'm the subject of nearly every discussion. (They refer to these as "discussions" instead of "quarrels," but Germans don't know the difference!) They criticize everything, and I mean everything, about me: my behavior, my personality, my manners; every inch of me, from head to toe and back again, is the subject of gossip and debate. Harsh words and shouts are constantly being flung at my head, though I'm absolutely not used to it. According to the powers that be, I'm supposed to grin and bear it. But I can't! I have no intention of taking their insults lying down. I'll show them that Anne Frank wasn't born yesterday. They'll sit up and take notice and keep their big mouths shut when I make them see they ought to attend to their own manners instead of mine. How dare they act that way! It's simply barbaric. I've been astonished, time and again, at such rudeness and most of all. . . at such stupidity (Mrs. van Daan). But as soon as I've gotten used to the idea, and that shouldn't take long, I'll give them a taste of their own medicine, and then they'll change their tune! Am I really as bad-mannered, headstrong, stubborn, pushy, stupid, lazy, etc., etc., as the van Daans say I am? No, of course not. I know I have my faults and shortcomings, but they blow them all out of proportion! If you only knew, Kitty, how I seethe when they scold and mock me. It won't take long before I explode with pent-up rage.

But enough of that. I've bored you long enough with my quarrels, and yet I can't resist adding a highly interesting dinner conversation.

Somehow we landed on the subject of Pim's extreme diffidence. His modesty is a well-known fact, which even the stupidest person wouldn't dream of questioning. All of a sudden Mrs. van Daan, who feels the need to bring herself into every conversation, remarked, "I'm very modest and retiring too, much more so than my husband!"
 
Have you ever heard anything so ridiculous? This sentence clearly illustrates that she's not exactly what you'd call modest!

Mr. van Daan, who felt obliged to explain the "much more so than my husband," answered calmly, "I have no desire to be modest and retiring. In my experience, you get a lot further by being pushy!" And turning to me, he added, "Don't be modest and retiring, Anne. It will get you nowhere."

Mother agreed completely with this viewpoint. But, as usual, Mrs. van Daan had to add her two cents. This time, however, instead of addressing me directly, she turned to my parents and said, "You must have a strange outlook on life to be able to say that to Anne. Things were different when I was growing up. Though they probably haven't changed much since then, except in your modern household!"

This was a direct hit at Mother's modern child-rearing methods, which she's defended on many occasions. Mrs. van Daan was so upset her face turned bright red. People who flush easily become even more agitated when they feel themselves getting hot under the collar, and they quickly lose to their opponents.

The nonflushed mother, who now wanted to have the matter over and done with as quickly as possible, paused for a moment to think before she replied. "Well, Mrs. van Daan, I agree that it's much better if a person isn't overmodest. My husband, Margot and Peter are all exceptionally modest. Your husband, Anne and I, though not exactly the opposite, don't let ourselves be pushed around."

Mrs. van Daan: "Oh, but Mrs. Frank, I don't understand what you mean! Honestly, I'm extremely modest and retiring. How can you say that I'm pushy?" 

Mother: "I didn't say you were pushy, but no one would describe you as having a retiring disposition." 

Mrs. van D.: "I'd like to know in what way I'm pushy! If I didn't look out for myself here, no one else would, and I'd soon starve, but that doesn't mean I'm not as modest and retiring as your husband."

Mother had no choice but to laugh at this ridiculous self-defense, which irritated Mrs. van Daan. Not exactly a born debater, she continued her magnificent account in a mixture of German and Dutch, until she got so tangled up in her own words that she finally rose from her chair and was just about to leave the room when her eye fell on me. You should have seen her! As luck would have it, the moment Mrs. van D. turned around I was shaking my head in a combination of compassion and irony. I wasn't doing it on purpose, but I'd followed her tirade so intently that my reaction was completely involuntary. Mrs. van D. wheeled around and gave me a tongue-lashing: hard, Germanic, mean and vulgar, exactly like some fat, red-faced fishwife. It was a joy to behold. If I could draw, I'd like to have sketched her as she was then. She struck me as so comical, that silly little scatterbrain! I've learned one thing: you only really get to know a person after a fight. Only then can you judge their true character!

Yours, Anne

TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 29, 1942

Dearest Kitty,

The strangest things happen to you when you're in hiding! Try to picture this. Because we don't have a bathtub, we wash ourselves in a washtub, and because there's only hot water in the office (by which I mean the entire lower floor), the seven of us take turns making the most of this great opportunity. But since none of us are alike and are all plagued by varying degrees of modesty, each member of the family has selected a different place to wash. Peter takes a bath in the office kitchen, even though it has a glass door. When it's time for his bath, he goes around to each of us in turn and announces that we shouldn't walk past the kitchen for the next half hour. He considers this measure to be sufficient. Mr. van D. takes his bath upstairs, figuring that the safety of his own room outweighs the difficulty of having to carry the hot water up all those stairs. Mrs. van D. has yet to take a bath; she's waiting to see which is the best place. Father bathes in the private office and Mother in the kitchen behind a fire screen, while Margot and I have declared the front office to be our bathing grounds. Since the curtains are drawn on Saturday afternoon, we scrub ourselves in the dark, while the one who isn't in the bath looks out the window through a chink in the curtains and gazes in wonder at the endlessly amusing people.

A week ago I decided I didn't like this spot and have been on the lookout for more comfortable bathing quarters. It was Peter who gave me the idea of setting my washtub in the spacious office bathroom. I can sit down, turn on the light, lock the door, pour out the water without anyone's help, and all without the fear of being seen. I used my lovely bathroom for the first time on Sunday and, strange as it may seem, I like it better than any other place.

The plumber was at work downstairs on Wednesday, moving the water pipes and drains from the office bathroom to the hallway so the pipes won't freeze during a cold winter. The plumber's visit was far from pleasant. Not only were we not allowed to run water during the day, but the bathroom was also off-limits. I'll tell you how we handled this problem; you may find it unseemly of me to bring it up, but I'm not so prudish about matters of this kind. On the day of our arrival, Father and I improvised a chamber pot, sacrificing a canning jar for this purpose. For the duration of the plumber's visit, canning jars were put into service during the daytime to hold our calls of nature. As far as I was concerned, this wasn't half as difficult as having to sit still all day and not say a word. You can imagine how hard that was for Miss Quack, Quack, Quack. On ordinary days we have to speak in a whisper; not being able to talk or move at all is ten times worse.

After three days of constant sitting, my backside was stiff and sore. Nightly calisthenics helped.

Yours, Anne

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 1, 1942

Dear Kitty,

Yesterday I had a horrible fright. At eight o'clock the doorbell suddenly rang. All I could think of was that someone was coming to get us, you know who I mean. But I calmed down when everybody swore it must have been either pranksters or the mailman.

The days here are very quiet. Mr. Levinsohn, a little Jewish pharmacist and chemist, is working for Mr. Kugler in the kitchen. Since he's familiar with the entire building, we're in constant dread that he'll take it into his head to go have a look at what used to be the laboratory. We're as still as baby mice. Who would have guessed three months ago that quicksilver Anne would have to sit so quietly for hours on end, and what's more, that she could?

Mrs. van Daan's birthday was the twenty-ninth. Though we didn't have a large celebration, she was showered with flowers, simple gifts and good food. Apparently the red carnations from her spouse are a family tradition.

Let me pause a moment on the subject of Mrs. van Daan and tell you that her attempts to flirt with Father are a constant source of irritation to me. She pats him on the cheek and head, hikes up her skirt and makes so-called witty remarks in an effort to get's Pim's attention. Fortunately, he finds her neither pretty nor charming, so he doesn't respond to her flirtations. As you know, I'm quite the jealous type, and I can't abide her behavior. After all, Mother doesn't act that way toward Mr. van D., which is what I told Mrs. van D. right to her face.

From time to time Peter can be very amusing. He and I have one thing in common: we like to dress up, which makes everyone laugh. One evening we made our appearance, with Peter in one of his mother's skin-tight dresses and me in his suit. He wore a hat; I had a cap on. The grown-ups split their sides laughing, and we enjoyed ourselves every bit as much.

Bep bought new skirts for Margot and me at The Bijenkorf. The fabric is hideous, like the burlap bag potatoes come in. Just the kind of thing the department stores wouldn't dare sell in the olden days, now costing 24.00 guilders (Margot's) and 7.75 guilders (mine). 

We have a nice treat in store: Bep's ordered a correspondence course in shorthand for Margot, Peter and me. Just you wait, by this time next year we'll be able to take perfect shorthand. In any case, learning to write a secret code like that is really interesting.

I have a terrible pain in my index finger (on my left hand), so I can't do any ironing. What luck! 

Mr. van Daan wants me to sit next to him at the table, since Margot doesn't eat enough to suit him. Fine with me, I like changes. There's always a tiny black cat roaming around the yard, and it reminds me of my dear sweet Moortje. Another reason I welcome the change is that Mama's always carping at me, especially at the table. Now Margot will have to bear the brunt of it. Or rather, won't, since Mother doesn't make such sarcastic remarks to her. Not to that paragon of virtue! I'm always teasing Margot about being a paragon of virtue these days, and she hates it. Maybe it'll teach her not to be such a goody-goody. High time she learned. 

To end this hodgepodge of news, a particularly amusing joke told by Mr. van Daan: What goes click ninety-nine times and clack once?

A centipede with a clubfoot.

Bye-bye, Anne

SATURDAY, OCTOBER 3, 1942

Dear Kitty,

Everybody teased me quite a bit yesterday because I lay down on the bed next to Mr. van Daan. "At your age! Shocking! " and other remarks along those lines. Silly, of course. I'd never want to sleep with Mr. van Daan the way they mean. 

Yesterday Mother and I had another run-in and she really kicked up a fuss. She told Daddy all my sins and I started to cry, which made me cry too, and I already had such an awful headache. I finally told Daddy that I love "him" more than I do Mother, to which he replied that it was just a passing phase, but I don't think so. I simply can't stand Mother, and I have to force myself not to snap at her all the time, and to stay calm, when I'd rather slap her across the face. I don't know why I've taken such a terrible dislike to her. Daddy says that if Mother isn't feeling well or has a headache, I should volunteer to help her, but I'm not going to because I don't love her and don't enjoy doing it. I can imagine Mother dying someday, but Daddy's death seems inconceivable. It's very mean of me, but that's how I feel. I hope Mother will never read this or anything else I've written.

I've been allowed to read more grown-up books lately. Eva's Youth by Nico van Suchtelen is currently keeping me busy. I don't think there's much of a difference between this and books for teenage girls. Eva thought that children grew on trees, like apples, and that the stork plucked them off the tree when they were ripe and brought them to the mothers. But her girlfriend's cat had kittens and Eva saw them coming out of the cat, so she thought cats laid eggs and hatched them like chickens, and that mothers who wanted a child also went upstairs a few days before their time to lay an egg and brood on it. After the babies arrived, the mothers were pretty weak from all that squatting. At some point, Eva wanted a baby too. She took a wool scarf and spread it on the ground so the egg could fall into it, and then she squatted down and began to push. She clucked as she waited, but no egg came out. Finally, after she'd been sitting for a long time, something did come, but it was a sausage instead of an egg. Eva was embarrassed. She thought she was sick. Funny, isn't it? There are also parts of Eva's Youth that talk about women selling their bodies on the street and asking loads of money. I'd be mortified in front of a man like that. In addition, it mentions Eva's menstruation. Oh, I long to get my period -- then I'll really be grown up. Daddy is grumbling again and threatening to take away my diary. Oh, horror of horrors! From now on, I'm going to hide it.

Anne Frank

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 7, 1942

I imagine that. . .

I've gone to Switzerland. Daddy and I sleep in one room, while the boys'. study is turned into a sitting room, where I can receive visitors. As a surprise, they've bought new furniture for me, including a tea table, a desk, armchairs and a divan. Everything's simply wonderful. After a few days Daddy gives me 150 guilders -- converted into Swiss money, of course, but I'll call them guilders -- and tells me to buy everything I think I'll need, all for myself. (Later on, I get a guilder a week, which I can also use to buy whatever I want.) I set off with Bernd and buy:

3 cotton undershirts @ 0.50 = 1.50
3 cotton underpants @ 0.50 = 1.50
3 wool undershirts @ O. 75 = 2.25
3 wool underpants @ O. 75 = 2.25
2 petticoats @ 0.50 = 1.00
2 bras (smallest size) @ 0.50 = 1.00
5 pajamas @ 1.00 = 5.00
1 summer robe @ 2.50 = 2.50
1 winter robe @ 3.00 = 3.00
2 bed jackets @ O. 75 = 1.50
. Anne's cousins Bernhard (Bernd) and Stephan Elias.
THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 53
1 small pillow @ 1.00 = 1.00
1 pair of lightweight slippers @ 1.00 = 1.00
1 pair of warm slippers @ 1.50 = 1.50
1 pair of summer shoes (school) @ 1.50 = 1.50
1 pair of summer shoes (dressy) @ 2.00 = 2.00
1 pair of winter shoes (school) @ 2.50 = 2.50
1 pair of winter shoes (dressy) @ 3.00 = 3.00
2 aprons @ 0.50 = 1.00
25 handkerchiefs @ 0.05 = 1.00
4 pairs of silk stockings @ 0.75 = 3.00
4 pairs of kneesocks @ 0.50 = 2.00
4 pairs of socks @ 0.25 = 1.00
2 pairs of thick stockings @ 1.00 = 2.00
3 skeins of white yarn (underwear, cap) = 1.50
3 skeins of blue yarn (sweater, skirt) = 1.50
3 skeins of variegated yarn (cap, scarf) = 1.50
Scarves, belts, collars, buttons = 1.25

Plus 2 school dresses (summer), 2 school dresses (winter), 2 good dresses (sumr.ner), 2 good dresses (winter), 1 summer skirt, 1 good winter skirt, 1 school winter skirt, 1 raincoat, 1 summer coat, 1 winter coat, 2 hats, 2 caps. For a total of 10g.00 guilders.

2 purses, 1 ice-skating outfit, 1 pair of skates, 1 case (containing powder, skin cream, foundation cream, cleansing cream, suntan lotion, cotton, first-aid kit, rouge, lipstick, eyebrow pencil, bath salts, bath powder, eau de cologne, soap, powder puff).

Plus 4 sweaters @ 1.50,4 blouses @ 1.00, miscellaneous items @ 10.00 and books, presents @ 4.50.

OCTOBER 9, 1942

Dearest Kitty,

Today I have nothing but dismal and depressing news to report. Our many Jewish friends and acquaintances are being taken away in droves. The Gestapo is treating them very roughly and transporting them in cattle cars to Westerbork, the big camp in Drenthe to which they're sending all the Jews. Miep told us about someone who'd managed to escape from there. It must be terrible in Westerbork. The people get almost nothing to eat, much less to drink, as water is available only one hour a day, and there's only one toilet and sink for several thousand people. Men and women sleep in the same room, and women and children often have their heads shaved. Escape is almost impossible; many people look Jewish, and they're branded by their shorn heads. 

If it's that bad in Holland, what must it be like in those faraway and uncivilized places where the Germans are sending them? We assume that most of them are being murdered. The English radio says they're being gassed. Perhaps that's the quickest way to die.

I feel terrible. Miep's accounts of these horrors are so heartrending, and Miep is also very distraught. The other day, for instance, the Gestapo deposited an elderly, crippled Jewish woman on Miep's doorstep while they set off to find a car. The old woman was terrified of the glaring searchlights and the guns firing at the English planes overhead. Yet Miep didn't dare let her in. Nobody would. The Germans are generous enough when it comes to punishment.

Bep is also very subdued. Her boyfriend is being sent to Germany. Every time the planes fly over, she's afraid they're going to drop their entire bomb load on Bertus's head. Jokes like "Oh, don't worry, they can't all fall on him" or "One bomb is all it takes" are hardly appropriate in this situation. Bertus is not the only one being forced to work in Germany. Trainloads of young men depart daily. Some of them try to sneak off the train when it stops at a small station, but only a few manage to escape unnoticed and find a place to hide.

But that's not the end of my lamentations. Have you ever heard the term "hostages"? That's the latest punishment for saboteurs. It's the most horrible thing you can imagine. Leading citizens -- innocent people -- are taken prisoner to await their execution. If the Gestapo can't find the saboteur, they simply grab five hostages and line them up against the wall. You read the announcements of their death in the paper, where they're referred to as "fatal accidents.' 

Fine specimens of humanity, those Germans, and to think I'm actually one of them! No, that's not true, Hitler took away our nationality long ago. And besides, there are no greater enemies on earth than the Germans and the Jews.

Yours, Anne

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 14, 1942

Dear Kitty,

I'm terribly busy. Yesterday I began by translating a chapter from La Belle Nivemaise and writing down vocabulary words. Then I worked on an awful math problem and translated three pages of French grammar besides. Today, French grammar and history. I simply refuse to do that wretched math every day. Daddy thinks it's awful too.

I'm almost better at it than he is, though in fact neither of us is any good, so we always have to call on Margot's help. I'm also working away at my shorthand, which I enjoy. Of the three of us, I've made the most progress.

I've read The Storm Family. It's quite good, but doesn't compare to Joop ter Heul. Anyway, the same words can be found in both books, which makes sense because they're written by the same author. Cissy van Marxveldt is a terrific writer. I'm definitely going to let my own children read her books too.

Moreover, I've read a lot of Korner plays. I like the way he writes. For example, Hedwig, The Cousin from Bremen, The Governess, The Green Domino, etc. 

Mother, Margot and I are once again the best of buddies. It's actually a lot nicer that way. Last night Margot and I were lying side by side in my bed. It was incredibly cramped, but that's what made it fun. She asked if she could read my diary once in a while.

"Parts of it," I said, and asked about hers. She gave me permission to read her diary as well.

The conversation turned to the future, and I asked what she wanted to be when she was older. But she wouldn't say and was quite mysterious about it. I gathered it had something to do with teaching; of course, I'm not absolutely sure, but I suspect it's something along those lines. I really shouldn't be so nosy.

This morning I'lay on Peter's bed, after first having chased him off it. He was furious, but I didn't care. He might consider being a little more friendly to me from time to time. After all, I did give him an apple last night.

I once asked Margot if she thought I was ugly. She said that I was cute and had nice eyes. A little vague, don't you think?

Well, until next time!

Anne Frank

PS. This morning we all took turns on the scale. Margot now weighs 132 pounds, Mother 136, Father 155, Anne 96, Peter 14g, Mrs. van Daan 117, Mr. van Daan 165. In the three months since I've been here, I've gained 19 pounds. A lot, huh?

TUESDAY, OCTOBER 20, 1942

Dearest Kitty,

My hand's still shaking, though it's been two hours since we had the scare. I should explain that there are five fire extinguishers in the building. The office staff stupidly forgot to warn us that the carpenter, or whatever he's called, was coming to fill the extinguishers. As a result, we didn't bother to be quiet until I heard the sound of hammering on the landing (across from the bookcase). I immediately assumed it was the carpenter and went to warn Bep, who was eating lunch, that she couldn't go back downstairs. Father and I stationed ourselves at the door so we could hear when the man had left. After working for about fifteen minutes, he laid his hammer and some other tools on our bookcase (or so we thought!) and banged on our door. We turned white with fear. Had he heard something after all and now wanted to check out this mysterious-looking bookcase? It seemed so, since he kept knocking, pulling, pushing and jerking on it.

I was so scared I nearly fainted at the thought of this total stranger managing to discover our wonderful hiding place. Just when I thought my days were numbered, we heard Mr. Kleiman's voice saying, "Open up, it's me." We opened the door at once. What had happened?

The hook fastening the bookcase had gotten stuck, which is why no one had been able to warn us about the carpenter. After the man had left, Mr. Kleiman came to get Bep, but couldn't open the bookcase. I can't tell you how relieved I was. In my imagination, the man I thought was trying to get inside the Secret Annex had kept growing and growing until he'd become not only a giant but also the cruelest Fascist in the world. Whew. Fortunately, everything worked out all right, at least this time.

We had lots of fun on Monday. Miep and Jan spent the night with us. Margot and I slept in Father and Mother's room for the night so the Gieses could have our beds. The menu was drawn up in their honor, and the meal was delicious. The festivities were briefly interrupted when Father's lamp caused a short circuit and we were suddenly plunged into darkness. What were we to do? We did have fuses, but the fuse box was at the rear of the dark warehouse, which made this a particularly unpleasant job at night. Still, the men ventured forth, and ten minutes later we were able to put away the candles.

I was up early this morning. Jan was already dressed. Since he had to leave at eight-thirty, he was upstairs eating breakfast by eight. Miep was busy getting dressed, and I found her in her undershirt when I came in. She wears the same kind of long underwear I do when she bicycles. Margot and I threw on our clothes as well and were upstairs earlier than usual. After a pleasant breakfast, Miep headed downstairs. It was pouring outside and she was glad she didn't have to bicycle to work. Daddy and I made the beds, and afterward I learned five irregular French verbs. Quite industrious, don't you think?

Margot and Peter were reading in our room, with Mouschi curled up beside Margot on the divan. After my irregular French verbs, I joined them and read The Woods Are Singingfor All Eternity. It's quite a beautiful book, but very unusual. I'm almost finished.

Next week it's Bep's turn to spend the night.

Yours, Anne 

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 29, 1942

My dearest Kitty,

I'm very worried. Father's sick. He's covered with spots and has a high temperature. It looks like measles. Just think, we can't even call a doctor! Mother is making him perspire in hopes of sweating out the fever.

This morning Miep told us that the furniture has been removed from the van Daans' apartment on Zuider-Amstellaan. We haven't told Mrs. van D. yet. She's been so "nervenmassig"* [*nervous] lately, and we don't feel like hearing her moan and groan again about all the beautiful china and lovely chairs she had to leave behind. We had to abandon most of our nice things too. What's the good of grumbling about it now?

Father wants me to start reading books by Hebbel and other well-known German writers. I can read German fairly well by now, except that I usually mumble the words instead of reading them silently to myself. But that'll pass. Father has taken the plays of Goethe and Schiller down from the big bookcase and is planning to read to me every evening. We've started off with Don Carlos. Encouraged by Father's good example, Mother pressed her prayer book into my hands. I read a few prayers in German, just to be polite. They certainly sound beautiful, but they mean very little to me. Why is she making me act so religious and devout?

Tomorrow we're going to light the stove for the first time. The chimney hasn't been swept in ages, so the room is bound to fill with smoke. Let's hope the thing draws!

Yours, Anne

MONDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 1942

Dear Kitty,

Bep stayed with us Friday evening. It was fun, but she didn't sleep very well because she'd drunk some wine. For the rest, there's nothing special to report. I had an awful headache yesterday and went to bed early. Margot's being exasperating again.

This morning I began sorting out an index card file from the office, because it'd fallen over and gotten all mixed up. Before long I was going nuts. I asked Margot and Peter to help, but they were too lazy, so I put it away.

I'm not crazy enough to do it all by myself!

Anne Frank

PS. I forgot to mention the important news that I'm probably going to get my period soon. I can tell because I keep finding a whitish smear in my panties, and Mother predicted it would start soon. I can hardly wait. It's such a momentous event. Too bad I can't use sanitary napkins, but you can't get them anymore, and Mama's tampons can be used only by women who've had a baby. i

COMMENT ADDED BY ANNE ON JANUARY 22, 1944: I wouldn't be able to write that kind of thing anymore. 

Now that I'm rereading my diary after a year and a half, I'm surprised at my childish innocence. Deep down I know I could never be that innocent again, however much I'd like to be. I can understand the mood chanaes and the comments about Margot, Mother and Father as if I'd written them only yesterday, but I can't imagine writina so openly about other matters. It embarrasses me areatly to read the panes dealina with subjects that I remembered as beina nicer than they actually were. My descriptions are so indelicate. But enouah of that.

I can also understand my homesickness and yearning for Moortje. The whole time I've been here I've longed unconsciously and at times consciously for trust, love and physical affection. This longing may change in intensity, but it's always there.

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 5, 1942

Dear Kitty,

The British have finally scored a few successes in Africa and Stalingrad hasn't fallen yet, so the men are happy and we had coffee and tea this morning. For the rest, nothing special to report.

This week I've been reading a lot and doing little work. That's the way things ought to be. That's surely the road to success. 

Mother and I are getting along better lately, but we're never close. Father's not very open about his feelings, but he's the same sweetheart he's always been. We lit the stove a few days ago and the entire room is still filled with smoke. I prefer central heating, and I'm probably not the only one. Margot's a stinker (there's no other word for it), a constant source of irritation, morning, noon and night.

Anne Frank

SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 7, 1942

Dearest Kitty,

Mother's nerves are very much on edge, and that doesn't bode well for me. Is it just a coincidence that Father and Mother never scold Margot and always blame me for everything? Last night, for example, Margot was reading a book with beautiful illustrations; she got up and put the book aside for later. I wasn't doing anything, so I picked it up and began looking at the pictures. Margot carne back, saw' "her" book in my hands, knitted her brow and angrily demanded the book back. I wanted to look through it some more. Margot got madder by the minute, and Mother butted in: "Margot was reading that book; give it back to her."

Father came in, and without even knowing what was going on, saw that Margot was being wronged and lashed out at me: "I'd like to see what you'd do if Margot was looking at one of your books!"

I promptly gave in, put the book down and, according to them, left the room' 'in a huff." I was neither huffy nor cross, but merely sad.

It wasn't right of Father to pass judgment without knowing what the issue was. I would have given the book to Margot myself, and a lot sooner, if Father and Mother hadn't intervened and rushed to take Margot's part, as if she were suffering some great injustice.

Of course, Mother took Margot's side; they always take each other's sides. I'm so used to it that I've become completely indifferent to Mother's rebukes and Margot's moodiness. I love them, but only because they're Mother and Margot. I don't give a darn about them as people. As far as I'm concerned, they can go jump in a lake. It's different with Father. When I see him being partial to Margot, approving Margot's every action, praising her, hugging her, I feel a gnawing ache inside, because I'm crazy about him. I model myself after Father, and there's no one in the world I love more. He doesn't realize that he treats Margot differently than he does me: Margot just happens to be the smartest, the kindest, the prettiest and the best. But I have a right to be taken seriously too. I've always been the clown and mischief maker of the family; I've always had to pay double for my sins: once with scoldings and then again with my own sense of despair. I'm no longer satisfied with the meaningless affection or the supposedly serious talks. I long for something from Father that he's incapable of giving. I'm not jealous of Margot; I never have been. I'm not envious of her brains or her beauty. It's just that I'd like to feel that Father really loves me, not because I'm his child, but because I'm me, Anne.

I cling to Father because my contempt of Mother is growing daily and it's only through him that I'm able to retain the last ounce of family feeling I have left. He doesn't understand that I sometimes need to vent my feelings for Mother. He doesn't want to talk about it, and he avoids any discussion involving Mother's failings. And yet Mother, with all her shortcomings, is tougher for me to deal with. I don't know how I should act. I can't very well confront her with her carelessness, her sarcasm and her hard-heartedness, yet I can't continue to take the blame for everything.

I'm the opposite of Mother, so of course we clash. I don't mean to judge her; I don't have that right. I'm simply looking at her as a mother. She's not a mother to me -- I have to mother myself. I've cut myself adrift from them. I'm charting my own course, and we'll see where it leads me. I have no choice, because I can picture what a mother and a wife should be and can't seem to find anything of the sort in the woman I'm supposed to call "Mother."

I tell myself time and again to overlook Mother's bad example. I only want to see her good points, and to look inside myself for what's lacking in her. But it doesn't work, and the worst part is that Father and Mother don't realize their own inadequacies and how much I blame them for letting me down. Are there any parents who can make their children completely happy?

Sometimes I think God is trying to test me, both now and in the future. I'll have to become a good person on my own, without anyone to serve as a model or advise me, but it'll make me stronger in the end.

Who else but me is ever going to read these letters? Who else but me can I turn to for comfort? I'm frequently in need of consolation, I often feel weak, and more often than not, I fail to meet expectations. I know this, and every day I resolve to do better.

They aren't consistent in their treatment of me. One day they say that Anne's a sensible girl and entitled to know everything, and the next that Anne's a silly goose who doesn't know a thing and yet imagines she's learned all she needs to know from books! I'm no longer the baby and spoiled little darling whose every deed can be laughed at. I have my own ideas, plans and ideals, but am unable to articulate them yet. 

Oh well. So much comes into my head at night when I'm alone, or during the day when I'm obliged to put up with people I can't abide or who invariably misinterpret my intentions. That's why I always wind up coming back to my diary -- I start there and end there because Kitty's always patient. I promise her that, despite everything, I'll keep going, that I'll find my own way and choke back my tears. I only wish I could see some results or, just once, receive encouragement from someone who loves me.

Don't condemn me, but think of me as a person who sometimes reaches the bursting point!

Yours, Anne

MONDAY, NOVEMBER 9,1942

Dearest Kitty,

Yesterday was Peter's birthday, his sixteenth. I was upstairs by eight, and Peter and I looked at his presents. He received a game of Monopoly, a razor and a cigarette lighter. Not that he smokes so much, not at all; it just looks so distinguished. 

The biggest surprise came from Mr. van Daan, who reported at one that the English had landed in Tunis, Algiers, Casablanca and Oran.

"This is the beginning of the end," everyone was saying, but Churchill, the British Prime Minister, who must have heard the same thing being repeated in England, declared, "This is not the end. It is not even the beginning of the end. But it is, perhaps, the end of the beginning." Do you see the difference? However, there's reason for optimism. Stalingrad, the Russian city that has been under attack for three months, still hasn't fallen into
German hands.

In the true spirit of the Annex, I should talk to you about food. (I should explain that they're real gluttons up on the top floor.)

Bread is delivered daily by a very nice baker, a friend of Mr. Kleiman's. Of course, we don't have as much as we did at home, but it's enough. We also purchase ration books on the black market. The price keeps going up; it's already risen from 27 to 33 guilders. And that for mere sheets of printed paper!

To provide ourselves with a source of nutrition that will keep, aside from the hundred cans of food we've stored here, we bought three hundred pounds of beans. Not just for us, but for the office staff as well. We'd hung the sacks of beans on hooks in the hallway, just inside our secret entrance, but a few seams split under the weight. So we decided to move them to the attic, and Peter was entrusted with the heavy lifting. He managed to get five of the six sacks upstairs intact and was busy with the last one when the sack broke and a flood, or rather a hailstorm, of brown beans went flying through the air and down the stairs. Since there were about fifty pounds of beans in that sack, it made enough noise to raise the dead. Downstairs they were sure the house was falling down around their heads. Peter was stunned, but then burst into peals of laughter when he saw me standing at the bottom of the stairs, like an island in a sea of brown, with waves of beans lapping at my ankles. We promptly began picking them up, but beans are so small and slippery that they roll into every conceivable corner and hole. Now each time we go upstairs, we bend over and hunt around so we can present Mrs. van Daan with a handful of beans.

I almost forgot to mention that Father has recovered from his illness.

Yours, Anne

P.S. The radio has just announced that Algiers has fallen. Morocco, Casablanca and Oran have been in English hands for several days. We're now waiting for Tunis.

TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 1942

Dearest Kitty,

Great news! We're planning to take an eighth person into hiding with us!

Yes, really. We always thought there was enough room and food for one more person, but we were afraid of placing an even greater burden on Mr. Kugler and Mr. Kleiman. But since reports of the dreadful things being done to the Jews are getting worse by the day, Father decided to sound out these two gentlemen, and they thought it was an excellent plan. "It's just as dangerous, whether there are seven or eight," they noted rightly. Once this was settled, we sat down and mentally went through our circle of acquaintances, trying to come up with a single person who would blend in well with our extended family. This wasn't difficult. After Father had rejected all the van Daan relatives, we chose a dentist named Alfred Dussel. He lives with a charming Christian lady who's quite a bit younger than he is. They're probably not married, but that's beside the point. He's known to be quiet and refined, and he seemed, from our superficial acquaintance with him, to be nice. Miep knows him as well, so she'll be able to make the necessary arrangements. If he comes, Mr. Dussel will have to sleep in my room instead of Margot, who will have to make do with the folding bed.* [*After Dussel arrived, Margot slept in her parents' bedroom.] We'll ask him to bring along something to fill cavities with.

Yours, Anne

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 12, 1942

Dearest Kitty,

Miep came to tell us that she'd been to see Dr. Dussel. He asked her the moment she entered the room if she knew of a hiding place and was enormously pleased when Miep said she had something in mind. She added "that he'd need to go into hiding as soon as possible, preferably Saturday, but he thought this was highly improbable, since he wanted to bring his records up to date, settle his accounts and attend to a couple of patients. Miep relayed the message to us this morning. We didn't think it was wise to wait so long. All these preparations require explanations to various people who we feel ought to be kept in the dark. Miep went to ask if Dr. Dussel couldn't manage to come on Saturday after all, but he said no, and now he's scheduled to arrive on Monday.

I think it's odd that he doesn't jump at our proposal. If they pick him up on the street, it won't help either his records or his patients, so why the delay? If you ask me, it's stupid of Father to humor him.

Otherwise, no news.

Yours, Anne

TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 1942

Dearest Kitty!

Mr. Dussel has arrived. Everything went smoothly. Miep told him to be at a certain place in front of the post office at 11 A.M., when a man would meet him, and he was at the appointed place at the appointed time. Mr. Kleiman went up to him, announced that the man he was expecting to meet was unable to come and asked him to drop by the office to see Miep. Mr. Kleiman took a streetcar back to the office while Mr. Dussel followed on foot. 

It was eleven-twenty when Mr. Dussel tapped on the office door. Miep asked him to remove his coat, so the yellow star couldn't be seen, and brought him to the private office, where Mr. Kleiman kept him occupied until the cleaning lady had gone. On the pretext that the private office was needed for something else, Miep took Mr. Dussel upstairs, opened the bookcase and stepped inside, while Mr. Dussellooked on in amazement.

In the meantime, the seven of us had seated ourselves around the dining table to await the latest addition to our family with coffee and cognac. Miep first led him into the Frank family's room. He immediately recognized our furniture, but had no idea we were upstairs, just above his head. When Miep told him, he was so astonished he nearly fainted. Thank goodness she didn't leave him in suspense any longer, but brought him upstairs. Mr. Dussel sank into a chair and stared at us in dumbstruck silence, as though he thought he could read the truth on our faces. Then he stuttered, "Aber . . . but are you nicht in Belgium? The officer, the auto, they were not coming? Your escape was not working?"

We explained the whole thing to him, about how we'd deliberately spread the rumor of the officer and the car to throw the Germans and anyone else who might come looking for us off the track. Mr. Dussel was speechless in the face of such ingenuity, and could do nothing but gaze around in surprise as he explored the rest of our lovely and ultrapractical Annex. We all had lunch together. Then he took a short nap, joined us for tea, put away the few belongings Miep had been able to bring here in advance and began to feel much more at home. Especially when we handed him the following typewritten rules and regulations for the Secret Annex (a van Daan production):

PROSPECTUS AND GUIDE TO THE SECRET ANNEX

A Unique Facility for the Temporary
Accommodation of Jews and Other
Dispossessed Persons

Open all year round: Located in beautiful, quiet, wooded surroundings in the heart of Amsterdam. No private residences in the vicinity. Can be reached by streetcar 13 or 17 and also by car and bicycle. For those to whom such transportation has been forbidden by the German authorities, it can also be reached on foot. Furnished and unfurnished rooms and apartments are available at all times, with or without meals.

Price: Free.

Diet: Low-fat.

Runnina water in the bathroom (sorry, no bath) and on various inside and outside walls. Cozy wood stoves for heating.

Ample storage space for a variety of goods. Two large, modern safes.

Private radio with a direct line to London, New York, Tel Aviv and many other stations. Available to all residents after 6 P.M. No listening to forbidden broadcasts, with certain exceptions, i.e., German stations may only be tuned in to listen to classical music. It is absolutely forbidden to listen to German news bulletins (regardless of where they are transmitted from) and to pass them on to others.

Rest hours: From 10 P.M. to 7:30 A.M.; 10:15 A.M. on Sundays. Owing to circumstances, residents are required to observe rest hours during the daytime when instructed to do so by the Management. To ensure the safety of all, rest hours must be strictly observed!!!

Free-time activities: None allowed outside the house until further notice.

Use of language: It is necessary to speak softly at all times. Only the language of civilized people may be spoken, thus no German.

Reading and relaxation: No German books may be read, except for the classics and works of a scholarly nature. Other books are optional.

Calisthenics: Daily.

Singing: Only softly, and after 6 P.M.

Movies: Prior arrangements required.

Classes: A weekly correspondence course in shorthand. Courses in English, French, math and history offered at any hour of the day or night. Payment in the form of tutoring, e.g., Dutch.

Separate department for the care of small household pets (with the exception of vermin, for which special permits are required).

Mealtimes:

Breakfast: At 9 A.M. daily except holidays and Sundays; at approximately 11:30 A.M. on Sundays and holidays.

Lunch: A light meal. From 1:15 P.M. to 1:45 P.M.

Dinner: Mayor not be a hot meal.

Mealtime depends on news broadcasts.

Obligations with respect to the Supply Corps: Residents must be prepared to help with office work at all times. Baths: The washtub is available to all residents after 9 A.M. on Sundays. Residents may bathe in the bathroom, kitchen, private office or front office, as they choose.

Alcohol: For medicinal purposes only.

The end.

Yours, Anne

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 19, 1942

Dearest Kitty,

Just as we thought, Mr. Dussel is a very nice man. Of course he didn't mind sharing a room with me; to be honest, I'm not exactly delighted at having a stranger use my things, but you have to make sacrifices for a good cause, and I'm glad I can make this small one. "If we can save even one of our friends, the rest doesn't matter," said Father, and he's absolutely right.

The first day Mr. Dussel was here, he asked me all sorts of questions -- for example, what time the cleaning lady comes to the office, how we've arranged to use the washroom and when we're allowed to go to the toilet. You may laugh, but these things aren't so easy in a hiding place. During the daytime we can't make any noise that might be heard downstairs, and when someone else is there, like the cleaning lady, we have to be extra careful. I patiently explained all this to Mr. Dussel, but I was surprised to see how slow he is to catch on. He asks everything twice and still can't remember what you've told him.

Maybe he's just confused by the sudden change and he'll get over it. Otherwise, everything is going fine.

Mr. Dussel has told us much about the outside world we've missed for so long. He had sad news. Countless friends and acquaintances have been taken off to a dreadful fate. Night after night, green and gray military vehicles cruise the streets. They knock on every door, asking whether any Jews live there. If so, the whole family is immediately taken away. If not, they proceed to the next house. It's impossible to escape their clutches unless you go into hiding. They often go around with lists, knocking only on those doors where they know there's a big haul to be made. They frequently offer a bounty, so much per head. It's like the slave hunts of the olden days. I don't mean to make light ofthisj it's much too tragic for that. In the evenings when it's dark, I often see long lines of good, innocent people, accompanied by crying children, walking on and on, ordered about by a handful of men who bully and beat them until they nearly drop. No one is spared. The sick, the elderly, children, babies and pregnant women -- all are marched to their death.

We're so fortunate here, away from the turmoil. We wouldn't have to give a moment's thought to all this suffering if it weren't for the fact that we're so worried about those we hold dear, whom we can no longer help. I feel wicked sleeping in a warm bed, while somewhere out there my dearest friends are dropping from exhaustion or being knocked to the ground.

I get frightened myself when I think of close friends who are now at the mercy of the cruelest monsters ever to stalk the earth.

And all because they're Jews.

Yours, Anne

FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 1942

Dearest Kitty,

We don't really know how to react. Up to now very little news about the Jews had reached us here, and we thought it best to stay as cheerful as possible. Every now and then Miep used to mention what had happened to a friend, and Mother or Mrs. van Daan would start to cry, so she decided it was better not to say any more. But we bombarded Mr. Dussel with questions, and the stories he had to tell were so gruesome and dreadful that we can't get them out of our heads. Once we've had time to digest the news, we'll probably go back to our usual joking and teasing. It won't do us or those outside any good if we continue to be as gloomy as we are now. And what would be the point of turning the Secret Annex into a Melancholy Annex?

No matter what I'm doing, I can't help thinking about those who are gone. I catch myself laughing and remember that it's a disgrace to be so cheerful. But am I supposed to spend the whole day crying? No, I can't do that. This gloom will pass.

Added to this misery there's another, but of a more personal nature, and it pales in comparison to the suffering I've just told you about. Still, I can't help telling you that lately I've begun to feel deserted. I'm surrounded by too great a void. I never used to give it much thought, since my mind was filled with my friends and having a good time. Now I think either about unhappy things or about myself. It's taken a while, but I've finally realized that Father, no matter how kind he may be, can't take the place of my former world. When it comes to my feelings, Mother and Margot ceased to count long ago.

But why do I bother you with this foolishness? I'm terribly ungrateful, Kitty, I know, but when I've been scolded for the umpteenth time and have all these other woes to think about as well, my head begins to reel!

Yours, Anne

SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 2g, 1942

Dearest Kitty,

We've been using too much electricity and have now exceeded our ration. The result: excessive economy and the prospect of having the electricity cut off. No light for fourteen days; that's a pleasant thought, isn't it? But who knows, maybe it won't be so long! It's too dark to read after four or four-thirty, so we while away the time with all kinds of crazy activities: telling riddles, doing calisthenics in the dark, speaking English or French, reviewing books -- after a while everything gets boring. Yesterday I discovered a new pastime: using a good pair of binoculars to peek into the lighted rooms of the neighbors. During the day our curtains can't be opened, not even an inch, but there's no harm when it's so dark.

I never knew that neighbors could be so interesting. Ours are, at any rate. I've come across a few at dinner, one family making home movies and the dentist across the way working on a frightened old lady.

Mr. Dussel, the man who was said to get along so well with children and to absolutely adore them, has turned out to be an old-fashioned disciplinarian and preacher of unbearably long sermons on manners. Since I have the singular pleasure (!) of sharing my far too narrow room with His Excellency, and since I'm generally considered to be the worst behaved of the three young people, it's all I can do to avoid having the same old scoldings and admonitions repeatedly flung at my head and to pretend not to hear. This wouldn't be so bad if Mr. Dussel weren't such a tattletale and hadn't singled out Mother to be the recipient of his reports. If Mr. Dussel's just read me the riot act, Mother lectures me all over again, this time throwing the whole book at me. And if I'm really lucky, Mrs. van D. calls me to account five minutes later and lays down the law as well!

Really, it's not easy being the badly brought-up center of attention of a family of nitpickers.

In bed at night, as I ponder my many sins and exaggerated shortcomings, I get so confused by the sheer amount of things I have to consider that I either laugh or cry, depending on my mood. Then I fall asleep with the strange feeling of wanting to be different than I am or being different than I want to be, or perhaps of behaving differently than I am or want to be.

Oh dear, now I'm confusing you too. Forgive me, but I don't like crossing things out, and in these times of

scarcity, tossing away a piece of paper is clearly taboo. So I can only advise you not to reread the above passage and  to make no attempt to get to the bottom of it, because  you'll never find your way out again! 

Yours, Anne 

MONDAY, DECEMBER 7, 1942 

Dearest Kitty, 

Hanukkah and St. Nicholas Day nearly coincided this  year; they were only one day apart. We didn't make much  of a fuss with Hanukkah, merely exchanging a few small  gifts and lighting the candles. Since candles are in short  supply, we lit them for only ten minutes, but as long as  we sing the song, that doesn't matter. Mr. van Daan made  a menorah out of wood, so that was taken care of too. 

St. Nicholas Day on Saturday was much more fun. During dinner Bep and Miep were so busy whispering to Father that our curiosity was aroused and we suspected  they were up to something. Sure enough, at eight o'clock  we all trooped downstairs through the hall in pitch darkness (it gave me the shivers, and I wished I was safely back  upstairs!) to the alcove. We could switch on the light,  since this room doesn't have any windows. When that was  done, Father opened the big cabinet. 

"Oh, how wonderful!" we all cried. 

In the corner was a large basket decorated with  colorful paper and a mask of Black Peter. 

We quickly took the basket upstairs with us. Inside  was a little gift for everyone, including an appropriate  verse. Since you're famthar with the kinds of poems peo ple write each other on St. Nicholas Day, I won't copy  them down for you. 

I received a Kewpie doll, Father got bookends, and  so on. Well anyway, it was a nice idea, and since the eight of us had never celebrated St. Nicholas Day before, this  was a good time to begin. 

Yours, Anne 

PS. We also had presents for everyone downstairs, a  few things .left over from the Good Old Days; plus Miep  and Bep are always grateful for money. 

Today we heard that Mr. van Daan' s ashtray, Mr. Dussel's picture frame and Father's bookends were made  by none other than Mr. Voskuijl. How anyone can be so  clever with his hands is a mystery to me! 

THURSDAY, DECEMBER 10, 1942 

Dearest Kitty, 

Mr. van Daan used to be in the meat, sausage and  spice business. He was hired for his knowledge of spices,  and yet, to our great delight, it's his sausage talents that  have come in handy now. 

We ordered a large amount of meat (under the  counter, of course) that we were planning to preserve in  case there were hard times ahead. Mr. van Daan decided  to make bratwurst, sausages and mettwurst. I had fun  watching him put the meat through the grinder: once,  twice, three times. Then he added the remaining ingredi ents to the ground meat and used a long pipe to force the  mixture into the casings. We ate the bratwurst with  sauerkraut for lunch, but the sausages, which were going  to be canned, had to dry first, so we hung them over a  pole suspended from the cethng. Everyone who came into  the room burst into laughter when they saw the dangling  sausages.It was such a comical sight. 

The kitchen was a shambles. Mr. van Daan, clad in  his wife's apron and looking fatter than ever, was working  away at the meat. What with his bloody hands, red face  and spotted apron, he looked like a real butcher. Mrs. D. was trying to do everything at once: learning Dutch out of a book, stirring   the soup, watching the meat, sighing and moaning about her broken rib. That's what happens when old (!) ladies do such stupid exercises to get rid of their fat behinds! Dussel had an eye infection and was sitting next to the stove dabbing his eye with camomile tea. Pim, seated in the one ray of sunshine coming through the window, kept having to move his chair this way and that to stay out of the way. His rheumatism must have been bothering him because he   was slightly hunched over and was keeping an eye on Mr. van Daan with an agonized expression on his face. He reminded me of those aged invalids you see in the poor-house. Peter was romping around the room with Mouschi, the cat, while Mother, Margot and I were peeling boiled potatoes. When you get right down to it, none of us were doing our work properly, because we were all so busy watching Mr. van Daan. 

Dussel has opened his dental practice. Just for fun, I'll describe the session with his very first patient. 

Mother was ironing, and Mrs. van D., the first victim, sat down on a chair   in the middle of the room. Dussel, unpacking his case with an air of   importance, asked for some eau de cologne, which could be used as a disinfectant, and vaseline, which would have to do for wax. He looked in Mrs. van D.'s mouth and found two teeth that made her wince with pain and utter incoherent cries every time he touched them. After a lengthy examination (lengthy as far as Mrs. van D. was concerned, since it actually took no longer than two minutes), Dussel began to scrape out a cavity. But Mrs. van D. had no intention of letting him. She flailed her arms and legs until Dussel finally let go of his probe and it . . . remained stuck in Mrs. van D.'s tooth. That really did it! Mrs. van D. lashed out wildly in all directions, cried (as much  as you can with an instrument like that in your mouth),  tried to remove it, but only managed to push it in even  farther. Mr. Dussel calmly observed the scene, his hands  on his hips, while the rest of the audience roared with  laughter. Of course, that was very mean of us. If it'd been  me, I'm sure I would have yelled even louder. After a  great deal of squirming, kicking, screaming and shouting, Mrs. van D. finally managed to yank the thing out, and Mr. Dussel went on with his work as if nothing had  happened. He was so quick that Mrs. van D. didn't have  time to pull any more shenanigans. But then, he had more  help than he's ever had before: no fewer than two assis tants; Mr. van D. and I performed our job well. The  whole scene resembled one of those engravings from the Middle Ages entitled" A Quack at Work." In the meantime, however, the patient was getting restless, since she  had to keep an eye on "her" soup and "her" food. One  thing is certain: it'll be a while before Mrs. van D. makes another dental appointment! 

Yours, Anne 

SUNDAY, DECEMBER 13, 1942 

Dearest Kitty, 

I'm sitting here nice and cozy in the front office, peering out through a chink in the heavy curtains. It's  dusky, but there's just enough light to write by. 

It's really strange watching people walk past. They all seem to be in such a hurry that they nearly trip over their own feet. Those on bicycles whiz by so fast I can't  even tell who's on the bike. The people in this neighborhood aren't particularly attractive to look at. The children especially are so dirty you wouldn't want to touch them with a ten-foot pole. Real slum kids with runny noses. I  can hardly understand a word they say. 

Yesterday afternoon, when Margot and I were taking  a bath, I said, "What if we took a fishing rod and reeled in each of those kids one by one as they walked by, stuck them in the tub, washed and mended their clothes and then. . ."  

"And then tomorrow they'd be just as dirty and tattered as they were before," Margot replied.  

But I'm babbling. There are also other things to look at cars, boats and the rain. I can hear the streetcar and the children and I'm enjoying myself.  

Our thoughts are subject to as little change as we  are. They're like a merry-go-round, turning from the Jews to food, from food to politics. By the way, speaking  of Jews, I saw two yesterday when I was peeking through ;  the curtains. I felt as though I were gazing at one of the Seven Wonders of the World. It gave me such a funny feeling, as if I'd denounced them to the authorities and was now spying on their misfortune. 

Across from us is a houseboat. The captain lives there with his wife and children. He has a small yapping dog. We know the little dog only by its bark and by its  tail, which we can see whenever it runs around the deck. Oh, what a shame, it's just started raining and most of the  people are hidden under their umbrellas. All I can see are  raincoats, and now and again the back of a stocking-capped head. Actually, I don't even need to look. By now I can recognize the women at a glance: gone to fat from  eating potatoes, dressed in a red or green coat and worn-out shoes, a shopping bag dangling from their arms, with  faces that are either grim or good-humored, depending on the mood of their husbands. 

Yours, Anne 

TUESDAY, DECEMBER 22, 1942 

Dearest Kitty, 

The Annex was delighted to hear that we'll all be  receiving an extra quarter pound of butter for Christmas. According to the newspaper, everyone is entitled to half a pound, but they mean those lucky souls who get their  ration books from the government, not Jews in hiding like us who can only afford to buy four rather than eight ration books on the black market. Each of us is going to bake something with the butter. This morning I made two  cakes and a batch of cookies. It's very busy upstairs, and Mother has informed me that I'm not to do any studying or reading until all the household chores have been finished. 

Mrs. van Daan is lying in bed nursing her bruised rib. She complains all day long, constantly demands that the bandages be changed and is generally dissatisfied with everything. I'll be glad when she gets back on her feet and  can clean up after herself because, I must admit, she's extraordinarily hardworking and neat, and as long as she's in good physical and mental condition, she's quite cheerful.

As if I don't hear "shh, shh" enough during the day  because I'm always making "too much" noise, my dear  roommate has come up with the idea of saying "shh, shh" to me all night too. According to him, I shouldn't even turn over. I refuse to take any notice of him, and  the next time he shushes me, I'm going to shush him  right back. 

He gets more exasperating and egotistical as the days go by. Except for the first week, I haven't seen even one of the cookies he so generously promised me. He's partic ularly infuriating on Sundays, when he switches on the  light at the crack of dawn to exercise for ten minutes. 

To me, the torment seems to last for hours, since  the chairs I use to make my bed longer are constantly being jiggled under my sleepy head. After rounding off his limbering-up exercises with a few vigorous arm swings, His Lordship begins dressing. His underwear is hanging on a hook, so first he lumbers over to get it and then  lumbers back, past my bed. But his tie is on the table, so  once again he pushes and bumps his way past the chairs. 

But I mustn't waste any more of your time griping about disgusting old men. It won't help matters anyway. My plans for revenge, such as unscrewing the lightbulb, locking the door and hiding his clothes, have unfortu nately had to be abandoned in the interests of peace. 

Oh, I'm becoming so sensible! We've got to be reasonable about everything we do here: studying, listen ing, holding our tongues, helping others, being kind, making compromises and I don't know what else! I'm  afraid my common sense, which was in short supply to  begin with, will be used up too quickly and I won't have any left by the time the war is over. 

Yours, Anne 

WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 13, 1943 

Dearest Kitty, 

This morning I was constantly interrupted, and as a result I haven't been able to finish a single thing I've begun. 

We have a new pastime, namely, filling packages with powdered gravy. The gravy is one of Gies & Co.'s  products. Mr. Kugler hasn't been able to find anyone else to fill the packages, and besides, it's cheaper if we do the  job. It's the kind of work they do in prisons. It's incredibly boring and makes us dizzy and giggly. 

Terrible things are happening outside. At any time of night and day, poor helpless people are being dragged out of their homes. They're allowed to take only a knapsack  and a little cash with them, and even then, they're robbed  of these possessions on the way. Families are torn apart; men, women and children are separated. Children come  home from school to find that their parents have disap peared. Women return from shopping to find their houses  sealed, their famthes gone. The Christians in Holland are also living in fear because their sons are being sent to Germany. Everyone is scared. Every night hundreds of planes pass over Holland on their way to German cities, to sow their bombs on German soil. Every hour hundreds, or maybe even thousands, of people are being  killed in Russia and Africa. No one can keep out of the conflict, the entire world is at war, and even though the 

Allies are doing better, the end is nowhere in sight. 

As for us, we're quite fortunate. Luckier than millions of people. It's quiet and safe here, and we're using our money to buy food. We're so selfish that we talk about "after the war" and look forward to new clothes and shoes, when actually we should be saving every penny  to help others when the war is over, to salvage whatever we can. 

The children in this neighborhood run around in thin shirts and wooden shoes. They have no coats, no caps, no stockings and no one to help them. Gnawing on a carrot to still their hunger pangs, they walk from their cold houses through cold streets to an even colder classroom. Things have gotten so bad in Holland that hordes of children stop passersby in the streets to beg for a piece of bread. 

I could spend hours telling you about the suffering the war has brought, but I'd only make myself more miserable. All we can do is wait, as calmly as possible, for it to end. Jews and Christians alike are waiting, the whole  world is waiting, and many are waiting for death. 

Yours, Anne 

SATURDAY, JANUARY 30, 1943 

Dearest Kitty, 

I'm seething with rage, yet I can't show it. I'd like to scream, stamp my foot, give Mother a good shaking, cry and I don't know what else because of the nasty words, mocking looks and accusations that she hurls at me day after day, piercing me like arrows from a tightly strung bow, which are nearly impossible to pull from my  body. I'd like to scream at Mother, Margot, the van Daans, Dussel and Father too: "Leave me alone, let me  have at least one night when I don't cry myself to sleep  with my eyes burning and my head pounding. Let me get  away, away from everything, away from this world!" But I  can't do that. I can't let them see my doubts, or the  wounds they've inflicted on me. I couldn't bear their  sympathy or their good-humored derision. It would only  make me want to scream even more. 

Everyone thinks I'm showing off when I talk, ridicu lous when I'm silent, insolent when I answer, cunning  when I have a good idea, lazy when I'm tired, selfish  when I eat one bite more than I should, stupid, cowardly,  calculating, etc., etc. All day long I hear nothing but what  an exasperating child I am, and although I laugh it off and  pretend not to mind, I do mind. I wish I could ask God to  give me another personality, one that doesn't antagonize  everyone.

But that's impossible. I'm stuck with the character I  was born with, and yet I'm sure I'm not a bad person. I  do my best to please everyone, more than they'd ever suspect in a million years. When I'm upstairs, I try to  laugh it off because I don't want them to see my troubles. 

More than once, after a series of absurd reproaches, I've snapped at Mother: "I don't care what you say. Why don't you just wash your hands of me -- I'm a hopeless  case." Of course, she'd tell me not to talk back and  virtually ignore me for two days. Then suddenly all would  be forgotten and she'd treat me like everyone else. 

It's impossible for me to be all smiles one day and venomous the next. I'd rather choose the golden mean, which isn't so golden, and keep my thoughts to myself. Perhaps sometime I'll treat the others with the same contempt as they treat me. Oh, if only I could. 

Yours, Anne 

FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 5, 1943 

Dearest Kitty, 

Though it's been ages since I've written to you  about the squabbles, there's still no change. In the begin ning Mr. Dussel took our soon-forgotten clashes very  seriously, but now he's grown used to them and no  longer tries to mediate. 

Margot and Peter aren't exactly what you'd call "young"; they're both so quiet and boring. Next to  them, I stick out like a sore thumb, and I'm always being  told, "Margot and Peter don't act that way. Why don't  you follow your sister's example!" I hate that. 

I confess that I have absolutely no desire to be like Margot. She's too weak-willed and passive to suit me; she lets herself be swayed by others and always backs down  under pressure. I want to have more spunk! But I keep  ideas like these to myself. They'd only laugh at me if I offered this in my defense. 

During meals the air is filled with tension. Fortunately, the outbursts are sometimes held in check by the "soup eaters," the people from the office who come up  to have a cup of soup for lunch. 

This afternoon Mr. van Daan again brought up the fact that Margot eats so little. "I suppose you do it to keep your figure," he added in a mocking tone. 

Mother, who always comes to Margot's defense, said in a loud voice, "I can't stand that stupid chatter of yours a minute longer." 

Mrs. van D. turned red as a beet. Mr. van D. stared straight ahead and said nothing. 

Still, we often have a good laugh. Not long ago Mrs. van D. was entertaining us with some bit of nonsense or  another. She was talking about the past, about how well  she got along with her father and what a flirt she was. "And you know," she continued, "my father told me  that if a gentleman ever got fresh, I was to say, 'Remem ber, sir, that I'm a lady,' and he'd know what I meant." We split our sides laughing, as if she'd told us a good joke. 

Even Peter, though he's usually quiet, occasionally gives rise to hilarity. He has the misfortune of adoring  foreign words without knowing what they mean. One  afternoon we couldn't use the toilet because there were  visitors in the office. Unable to wait, he went to the  bathroom but didn't flush the toilet. To warn us of the  unpleasant odor, he tacked a sign to the bathroom door: "RSVP -- gas!" Of course, he meant "Danger -- gas!" but he thought "RSVP" looked more elegant. He didn't have the faintest idea that it meant "please reply." 

Yours, Anne 

SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 27, 1943 

Dearest Kitty, 

Pim is expecting the invasion any day now. Churchill has had pneumonia, but is gradually getting better. Gandhi, the champion of Indian freedom, is on one of his umpteenth hunger strikes. 

Mrs. van D. claims she's fatalistic. But who's the most afraid when the guns go off? None other than Petronella van Daan. 

Jan brought along the episcopal letter that the bishops addressed to their parishioners. It was beautiful and inspiring. "People of the Netherlands, stand up and take  action. Each of us must choose our own weapons to fight  for the freedom of our country, our people and our reli gion! Give your help and support. Act now!" This is what  they're preaching from the pulpit. Will it do any good? It's definitely too late to help our fellow Jews. 

Guess what's happened to us now? The owner of the building sold it without informing Mr. Kugler and Mr. Kleiman. One morning the new landlord arrived with an architect to look the place over. Thank goodness Mr. Kleiman was in the office. He showed the gentlemen all there was to see, with the exception of the Secret Annex. He claimed he'd left the key at home and the new owner  asked no further questions. If only he doesn't come back demanding to see the Annex. In that case, we'll be in big trouble! 

Father emptied a card file for Margot and me and filled it with index cards that are blank on one side. This is to become our reading file, in which Margot and I are supposed to note down the books we've read, the author and the date. I've learned two new words: "brothel" and "coquette." I've bought a separate notebook for new  words. 

There's a new division of butter and margarine. Each person is to get their portion on their own plate. The distribution is very unfair. The van Daans, who always make breakfast for everyone, give themselves one and a half times more than they do us. My parents are much too afraid of an argument to say anything, which is a shame, because I think people like that should always be given a taste of their own medicine. 

Yours, Anne 

THURSDAY, MARCH 4, 1943 

Dearest Kitty, 

Mrs. van D. has a new nickname -- we've started calling her Mrs. Beaverbrook. Of course, that doesn't  mean anything to you, so let me explain. A certain Mr. Beaverbrook often talks on the English radio about what he considers to be the far too lenient bombardment of Germany. Mrs. van Daan, who always contradicts everyone, including Churchill and the news reports, is in complete agreement with Mr. Beaverbrook. So we thought it would be a good idea for her to be married to him, and  since she was flattered by the notion, we've decided to  call her Mrs. Beaverbrook from now on. 

We're getting a new warehouse employee, since the  old one is being sent to Germany. That's bad for him but good for us because the new one won't be famthar with the building. We're still afraid of the men who work in the warehouse. 

Gandhi is eating again. 

The black market is doing a booming business. If we  had enough money to pay the ridiculous prices, we could stuff ourselves silly. Our greengrocer buys potatoes from the "Wehrmacht" and brings them in sacks to the private  office. Since he suspects we're hiding here, he makes a point of coming during lunchtime, when the warehouse  employees are out. 

So much pepper is being ground at the moment that we sneeze and cough with every breath we take. Everyone who comes upstairs greets us with an "ah-CHOO." Mrs. van D. swears she won't go downstairs; one more whiff of  pepper and she's going to get sick. 

I don't think Father has a very nice business. Noth ing but pectin and pepper. As long as you're in the food  business, why not make candy? 

A veritable thunderstorm of words came crashing  down on me again this morning. The air flashed with so  many coarse expressions that my ears were ringing with "Anne's bad this" annd "van Daans' good that." Fire and  brimstone! 

Yours, Anne 

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 10, 1943 

Dearest Kitty, 

We had a short circuit last night, and besides that, the guns were booming away until dawn. I still haven't gotten over my fear of planes and shooting, and I crawl into Father's bed nearly every night for comfort. I know it  sounds childish, but wait till it happens to you! The ack-ack guns make so much noise you can't hear your own voice. Mrs. Beaverbrook, the fatalist, practically burst into tears and said in a timid little voice, "Oh, it's so  awful. Oh, the guns are so loud!" -- which is another way  of saying "I'm so scared." 

It didn't seem nearly as bad by candlelight as it did  in the dark. I was shivering, as if I had a fever, and begged 

Father to relight the candle. He was adamant: there was  to be no light. Suddenly we heard a burst of machine-gun  fire, and that's ten times worse than antiaircraft guns. Mother jumped out of bed and, to Pim's great annoyance, lit the candle. Her resolute answer to his grumbling was, "After all, Anne is not an ex-soldier!" And that was the end of that! 

Have I told you any of Mrs. van D.'s other fears? I  don't think so. To keep you up to date on the latest adventures in the Secret Annex, I should tell you this as well. One night Mrs. van D. thought she heard loud footsteps in the attic, and she was so afraid of burglars, she woke her husband. At that very same moment, the thieves disappeared, and the only sound Mr. van D. could  hear was the frightened pounding of his fatalistic wife's heart. "Oh, Putti!" she cried. (Putti is Mrs. van D.'s pet name for her husband.) "They must have taken all our sausages and dried beans. And what about Peter? Oh, do you think Peter's still safe and sound in his bed?" 

"I'm sure they haven't stolen Peter. Stop being such a ninny, and let me get back to sleep!"

Impossible. Mrs. van D. was too scared to sleep. 

A few nights later the entire van Daan family was awakened by ghostly noises. Peter went to the attic with a flashlight and -- scurry, scurry -- what do you think he saw running away? A whole slew of enormous rats! 

Once we knew who the thieves were, we let Mouschi sleep in the attic and never saw our uninvited guests again. . . at least not at night. 

A few evenings ago (it was seven-thirty and still light), Peter went up to the loft to get some old newspapers. He had to hold on tightly to the trapdoor to climb down the ladder. He put down his hand without looking,  and nearly fell off the ladder from shock and pain. Without realizing it, he'd put his hand on a large rat, which  had bitten him in the arm. By the time he reached us, white as a sheet and with his knees knocking, the blood had soaked through his pajamas. No wonder he was so shaken, since petting a rat isn't much fun, especially when it takes a chunk out of your arm. 

Yours, Anne 

FRIDAY, MARCH 12, 1943 

Dearest Kitty, 

May I introduce: Mama Frank, the children's advocate! Extra butter for the youngsters, the problems facing today's youth -- you name it, and Mother defends the younger generation. After a skirmish or two, she always gets her way. 

One of the jars of pickled tongue is spoiled. A feast for Mouschi and Boche. 

You haven't met Boche yet, despite the fact that she was here before we went into hiding. She's the warehouse and office cat, who keeps the rats at bay in the storeroom. 

Her odd, political name can easily be explained. For a  while the firm Gies & Co. had two cats: one for the  warehouse and one for the attic. Their paths crossed from  time to time, which invariably resulted in a fight. The  warehouse cat was always the aggressor, while the attic cat was ultimately the victor, just as in politics. So the warehouse cat was named the German, or "Boche," and  the attic cat the Englishman, or "Tommy." Sometime  after that they got rid of Tommy, but Boche is always there to amuse us when we go downstairs. 

VVe've eaten so many brown beans and navy beans  that I can't stand to look at them. Just thinking about them makes me sick. 

Our evening serving of bread has been canceled. 

Daddy just said that he's not in a very cheerful mood. His eyes look so sad again, the poor man! 

I can't tear myself away from the book A Knock at the Door by Ina Bakker Boudier. This family saga is extremely well written, but the parts dealing with war, writers and the emancipation of women aren't very good. To be honest, these subjects don't interest me much. 

Terrible bombing raids on Germany. Mr. van Daan is grouchy. The reason: the cigarette shortage. 

The debate about whether or not to start eating the canned food ended in our favor. 

I can't wear any of my shoes, except my ski boots, which are not very practical around the house. A pair of straw thongs that were purchased for 6.50 guilders were  worn down to the soles within a week. Maybe Miep will be able to scrounge up something on the black market. 

It's time to cut Father's hair. Pim swears that I do such a good job he'll never go to another barber after the war. If only I didn't nick his ear so often! 

Yours, Anne 

THURSDAY, MARCH 18, 1943 

My dearest Kitty, 

Turkey's entered the war. Great excitement. Anxiously awaiting radio reports. 

FRIDAY, MARCH 19, 1943 

Dearest Kitty, 

In less than an hour, joy was followed by disappoint ment. Turkey hasn't entered the war yet. It was only a cabinet minister talking about Turkey giving up its neu trality sometime soon. The newspaper vendor in Dam Square was shouting "Turkey on England's side!" and the  papers were being snatched out of his hands. This was how we'd heard the encouraging rumor. 

Thousand-guilder notes are being declared invalid. That'll be a blow to the black marketeers and others like them, but even more to pe Ie in hiding and anyone else  with money that can't be accounted for. To turn in a  thousand-guilder bill, you have to be able to state how  you came by it and provide proof. They can still be used to pay taxes, but only until next week. The five-hundred  notes will lapse at the same time. Gies & Co. still had  some unaccounted-for thousand-guilder bills, which they  used to pay their estimated taxes for the coming years, so everything seems to be aboveboard. 

Dussel has received an old-fashioned, foot-operated dentist's drill. That means I'll probably be getting a thorough checkup soon. 

Dussel is terribly lax when it comes to obeying the rules of the house. Not only does he write letters to his Charlotte, he's also carrying on a chatty correspondence with various other people. Margot, the Annex's Dutch teacher, has been correcting these letters for him. Father has forbidden him to keep up the practice and Margot has stopped correcting the letters, but I think it won't be long before he starts up again. 

The Fuhrer has been talking to wounded soldiers. We listened on the radio, and it was pathetic. The questions and answers went something like this: 

"My name is Heinrich Scheppel." 

"Where were you wounded?" 

"Near Stalingrad." 

"What kind of wound is it?" 

"Two frostbitten feet and a fracture of the left arm." 

This is an exact report of the hideous puppet show aired on the radio. The wounded seemed proud of their wounds -- the more the better. One was so beside himself at the thought of shaking hands (I presume he still had one) with the Fuhrer that he could barely say a word. 

I happened to drop Dussel's soap on the floor and step on it. Now there's a whole piece missing. I've already asked Father to compensate him for the damages, especially since Dussel only gets one bar of inferior wartime soap a month. 

Yours, Anne 

THURSDAY, MARCH 25, 1943 

Dearest Kitty, 

Mother, Father, Margot and I were sitting quite pleasantly together last night when Peter suddenly came in and whispered in Father's ear. I caught the words "a barrel falling over in the warehouse" and "someone fiddling with the door." 

Margot heard it too, but was trying to calm me down, since I'd turned white as chalk and was extremely nervous. The three of us waited while Father and Peter went downstairs. A minute or two later Mrs. van Daan came up from where she'd been listening to the radio and told us that Pim had asked her to turn it off and tiptoe upstairs. But you know what happens when you're trying to be quiet -- the old stairs creaked twice as loud. Five minutes later Peter and Pim, the color drained from their faces, appeared again to relate their experiences. 

They had positioned themselves under the staircase  and waited. Nothing happened. Then all of a sudden they heard a couple of bangs, as if two doors had been  slammed shut inside the house. Pim bounded up the stairs, while Peter went to warn Dussel, who finally pre sented himself upstairs, though not without kicking up a fuss and making a lot of noise. Then we all tiptoed in our stockinged feet to the van Daans on the next floor. Mr. van D. had a bad cold and had already gone to bed, so we  gathered around his bedside and discussed our suspicions in a whisper. Every time Mr. van D. coughed loudly, Mrs. van D. and I nearly had a nervous fit. He kept coughing until someone came up with the bright idea of  giving him codeine. His cough subsided immediately. 

Once again we waited and waited, but heard nothing. Finally we came to the conclusion that the burglars had taken to their heels when they heard footsteps in an otherwise quiet building. The problem now was that the  chairs in the private office were neatly grouped around  the radio, which was tuned to England. If the burglars had forced the door and the air-raid wardens were to notice it and call the police, there could be very serious repercus sions. So Mr. van Daan got up, pulled on his coat and pants, put on his hat and cautiously followed Father down the stairs, with Peter (armed with a heavy hammer, to be on the safe side) right behind him. The ladies (including Margot and me) waited in suspense until the men returned five minutes later and reported that there was no  sign of any activity in the building. We agreed not to run any water or flush the toilet; but since everyone's stomach was churning from all the tension, you can imagine the  stench after we'd each had a turn in the bathroom. 

Incidents like these are always accompanied by other disasters, and this was no exception. Number one: the Westertoren bells stopped chiming, and I'd always found them so comforting. Number two: Mr. Voskuijlleft early last night, and we weren't sure if he'd given Bep the key and she'd forgotten to lock the door. 

But that was of little importance now. The night had just begun, and we still weren't sure what to expect. We were somewhat reassured by the fact that between eight-fifteen -- when the burglar had first entered the building and put our lives in jeopardy, and ten-thirty, we hadn't heard a sound. The more we thought about it, the less likely it seemed that a burglar would have forced a door so early in the evening, when there were still people out on the streets. Besides that, it occurred to us that the warehouse manager at the Keg Company next door might still have been at work. What with the excitement and the  thin walls, it's easy to mistake the sounds. Besides, your imagination often plays tricks on you in moments of danger. 

So we went to bed, though not to sleep. Father and Mother and Mr. Dussel were awake most of the night, and I'm not exaggerating when I say that I hardly got a wink of sleep. This morning the men went downstairs to  see if the outside door was still locked, but all was well! 

Of course, we gave the entire office staff a blow-by-blow account of the incident, which had been far from pleasant. It's much easier to laugh at these kinds of things after they've happened, and Bep was the only one who  took us seriously. 

Yours, Anne 

PS. This morning the toilet was clogged, and Father had to stick in a long wooden pole and fish out several pounds of excrement and strawberry recipes (which is what we use for toilet paper these days). Afterward we burned the pole. 

SATURDAY, MARCH 27, 1943 

Dearest Kitty, 

We've finished our shorthand course and are now  working on improving our speed. Aren't we smart! Let  me tell you more about my "time killers" (this is what I call my courses, because all we ever do is try to make the days go by as quickly as possible so we are that much closer to the end of our time here). I adore mythology, espe cially the Greek and Roman gods. Everyone here thinks my interest is just a passing fancy, since they've never heard of a teenager with an appreciation of mythology. Well then, I guess I'm the first! 

Mr. van Daan has a cold. Or rather, he has a scratchy throat, but he's making an enormous to-do over it. He gargles with camomile tea, coats the roof of his mouth with a tincture of myrrh and rubs Mentholatum over his chest, nose, gums and tongue. And to top it off, he's in a foul mood! 

Rauter, some German bigwig, recently gave a speech. "All Jews must be out of the German-occupied territories before July 1. The province of Utrecht will be cleansed of Jews [as if they were cockroaches] between April 1 and May 1, and the provinces of North and South Holland between May 1 and June 1." These poor people are being shipped off to filthiy slaughterhouses like a herd of sick and neglected cattle. But I'll say no more on the subject. My own thoughts give me nightmares! 

One good piece of news is that the Labor Exchange was set on fire in an act of sabotage. A few days later the County Clerk's Office also went up in flames. Men posing as German police bound and gagged the guards and managed to destroy some important documents. 

Yours, Anne 

THURSDAY, APRIL 1, 1943 

Dearest Kitty, 

I'm not really in the mood for pranks (see the date). 

On the contrary, today I can safely quote the saying" Misfortunes never come singly." First, Mr. Kleiman, our merry sunshine, had another bout of gastrointestinal hemorrhaging yesterday and  will have to stay in bed for at least three weeks. I should tell you that his stomach has been bothering him quite a bit, and there's no cure. Second, Bep has the flu. Third, Mr. Voskuijl has to go to the hospital next week. He  probably has an ulcer and will have to undergo surgery. Fourth, the managers of Pomosin Industries came from Frankfurt to discuss the new Opekta deliveries. Father had gone yer the important points with Mr. Kleiman, and there wasn't enough time to give Mr. Kugler a thor ough briefing.

The gentlemen arrived from Frankfurt, and Father was already shaking at the thought of how the talks would go. "If only I could be there, if only I were downstairs," he exclaimed. 

"Go lie down with your ear to the floor. They'll be brought to the private office, and you'll be able to hear everything.'  

Father's face cleared, and yesterday morning at ten-thirty Margot and Pim (two ears are better than one) took up their posts on the floor. By noon the talks weren't  finished, but Father was in no shape to continue his listen ing campaign. He was in agony from having to lie for hours in such an unusual and uncomfortable position. At two-thirty we heard voices in the hall, and I took his  place; Margot kept me company. The conversation was so long-winded and boring that I suddenly fell asleep on the cold, hard linoleum. Margot didn't dare touch me for fear they'd hear us, and of course she couldn't shout. I slept for a good half hour and then awoke with a start, having forgotten every word of the important discussion. Luckily, Margot had paid more attention. 

Yours, Anne 

FRIDAY, APRIL 2, 1943 

Dearest Kitty, 

Oh my, another item has been added to my list of  sins. Last night~ was lying in bed, waiting for Father to  tuck me in an say my prayers with me, when Mother came into the room, sat on my bed and asked very gently, "Anne, Daddy isn't ready. How about if I listen to your prayers tonight?"

"No, Momsy," I replied. 

Mother got up, stood beside my bed for a moment and then slowly walked toward the door. Suddenly she turned, her face contorted with pain, and said, "I don't want to be angry with you. I can't make you love me!" A few tears slid down her cheeks as she went out the door. 

I lay still, thinking how mean it was of me to reject her so cruelly, but I also knew that I was incapable of answering her any other way. I can't be a hypocrite and  pray with her when I don't feel like it. It just doesn't work that way. I felt sorry for Mother -- very, very sorry -- because for the first time in my life I noticed she wasn't indifferent to my coldness. I saw the sorrow in her face when she talked about not being able to make me love  her. It's hard to tell the truth, and yet the truth is that she's the one who's rejected me. She's the one whose tactless comments and cruel jokes about matters I don't think are funny have made me insensitive to any sign of love on her part. Just as my heart sinks every time I hear her harsh words, that's how her heart sank when she realized there was no more love between us. 

She cried half the night and didn't get any sleep. Father has avoided looking at me, and if his eyes do happen to cross mine, I can read his unspoken words: "How can you be so unkind? How dare you make your mother so sad!" 

Everyone expects me to apologize, but this is not something I can apologize for, because I told the truth, and sooner or later Mothjr was bound to find out anyway. I seem to be indifferent to Mother's tears and Father's glances, and I am, because both of them are now  feeling what I've always felt. I can only feel sorry for Mother, who will have to figure out what her attitude  should be all by herself. For my part, I will continue to  remain silent and aloof, and I don't intend to shrink from  the truth, because the longer it's postponed, the harder it  will be for them to accept it when they do hear it! 

Yours, Anne 

TUESDAY, APRIL 27, 1943 

Dearest Kitty, 

The house is still trembling from the aftereffects of the quarrels. Everyone is mad at everyone else: Mother and I, Mr. van Daan and Father, Mother and Mrs. van D. Terrific atmosphere, don't you think? Once again Anne's usual list of shortcomings has been extensively aired. 

Our German visitors were back last Saturday. They stayed until six. We all sat upstairs, not daring to move an  inch. If there's no one else working in the building or in  the neighborhood, you can hear every single step in the  private office. I've got ants in my pants again from having to sit still so long. 

Mr. Voskuijl has been hospitalized, but Mr. Kleiman's back at the office. His stomach stopped bleeding sooner than it normally does. He told us that the County Clerk's Office took an extra beating because the firemen flooded the entire building instead of just putting out the fire. That does my heart good! 

The Carlton Hotel has been destroyed. Two British planes loaded with firebombs landed right on top of the 

German Officers' Club. The entire corner of Vijzelstraat and Singel has gone up in flames. The number of air strikes on German cities is increasing daily. We haven't had a good night's rest in ages, and I have bags under my eyes from lack of sleep.

Our food is terrible. Breakfast consists of plain, unbuttered brea and ersatz coffee. For the last two weeks lunch has been e. spinach or cooked lettuce with huge potatoes that have a rotten, sweetish taste. If you're trying to diet, the Annex is the place to be! Upstairs they complain bitterly, but we don't think it's such a tragedy.

All the Dutch men who either fought or were mobilized in 1940 have been called up to work in prisoner-of-war camps. I bet they're taking this precaution because of the invasion!

Yours, Anne

SATURDAY, MAY 1, 1943

Dearest Kitty,

Yesterday was Dussel's birthday. At first he acted as if he didn't want to celebrate it, but when Miep arrived with a large shopping bag overflowing with gifts, he was as excited as a little kid. His darling' 'Lotje" has sent him eggs, butter, cookies, lemonade, bread, cognac, spice cake, flowers, oranges, chocolate, books and writing paper. He piled his presents on a table and displayed them for no fewer than three days, the silly old goat!

You mustn't get the idea that he's starving. We found bread, cheese, jam and eggs in his cupboard. It's absolutely disgraceful that Dussel, whom we've treated with such kindness and whom we took in to save from destruction, should stuff himself behind our backs and not give us anything. After all, we've shared all we had with him! But what's worse, in our opinion, is that he's so stingy with respect to Mr. Kleiman, Mr. Voskuijl and Bep. He doesn't give them a thing. In Dussel's view the oranges that Kleiman so badly needs for his sick stomach will benefit his own stomach even more. 

Tonight the guns have been banging away so much that I've already had to gather up my belongings four times. Today I packed a suitcase Wl f;the stuff I'd need in case we had to flee, but as M ther correctly noted,

"Where would you go?"

All of Holland is being punishe or the workers' strikes. Martial law has been declared, and everyone is going to get one less butter coupon. What naughty children.

I washed Mother's hair this evening, which is no easy task these days. We have to use a very sticky liquid cleanser because there's no more shampoo. Besides that, Moms had a hard time combing her hair because the family comb has only ten teeth left. 

Yours, Anne

SUNDAY, MAY 2, 1943

When I think about our lives here, I usually come to the conclusion that we live in a paradise compared to the Jews who aren't in hiding. All the same, later on, when everything has returned to normal, I'll probably wonder how we, who always lived in such comfortable circumstances, could have "sunk" so low. With respect to manners, I mean. For example, the same oilcloth has covered the dining table ever since we've been here. After so much use, it's hardly what you'd call spotless. I do my best to clean it, but since the dishcloth was also purchased before we went into hiding and consists of more holes than cloth, it's a thankless task. The van Daans have been sleeping all winter long on the same flannel sheet, which can't be washed because detergent is rationed and in short supply. Besides, it's of such poor quality that it's practically useless. Father is walking around in frayed trousers, and his tie is also showing signs of wear and tear. Mama's corset snapped today and is beyond repair, while Margot is wearing a bra that's two sizes too small, Mother and Margot have shared the same three undershorts the entire winter, and mine are so small they don't even cover my stomach. These are all things that can be overcome, but I sometimes wonder: how can we, whose every possession, from my underpants to Father's shaving brush, is so old and worn, ever hope to regain the position we had before the war?

SUNDAY, MAY 2, 1943

The Attitude of the Annex Residents Toward the War

Mr. van Daan. In the opinion of us all, this revered gentleman has great insight into politics. Nevertheless, he predicts we'll have to stay here until the end of '43. That's a very long time, and yet it's possible to hold out until then. But who can assure us that this war, which has caused nothing but pain and sorrow, will then be over? And that nothing will have happened to us and our helpers long before that time? No one! That's why each and every day is filled with tension. Expectation and hope generate tension, as does fear -- for example, when we hear a noise inside or outside the house, when the guns go off or when we read new "proclamations" in the paper, since we're afraid our helpers might be forced to go into hiding themselves sometime. These days everyone is talking about having to hide. We don't know how many people are actually in hiding; of course, the number is relatively small compared to the general population, but later on we'll no doubt be astonished at how many good people in Holland were willing to take Jews and Christians, with or without money, into their homes. There're also an unbelievable number of people with false identity papers.

Mrs. van Daan. When this beautiful damsel (by her own account) heard that it was getting easier these days to obtain false IDs, she immediately proposed that we each have one made. As if there were nothing to it, as if Father and Mr. van Daan were made of money.

Mrs. van Daan is always sating the most ridiculous things, and her Putti is often exasperated. But that's not surprising, because one day Kerli announces, "When this is allover, I'm going to have myself baptized"; and the next, "As long as I can remember, I've wanted to go to Jerusalem. I only feel at home with other jews!"

Pim is a big optimist, but he always has his reasons.

Mr. Dussel makes up everything as he goes along, and anyone wishing to contradict His Majesty had better think twice. In Alfred Dussel's home his word is law, but that doesn't suit Anne Frank in the least.

What the other members of the Annex family think about the war doesn't matter. When it comes to politics, these four are the only ones who count. Actually, only two of them do, but Madame van Daan and Dussel include themselves as well.

TUESDAY, MAY 18, 1943

Dearest Kit,

I recently witnessed a fierce dogfight between German and English pilots. Unfortunately, a couple of Allied airmen had to jump out of their burning plane. Our milkman, who lives in Halfweg, saw four Canadians sitting along the side of the road, and one of them spoke fluent Dutch. He asked the milkman if he had a light for his cigarette, and then told him the crew had consisted of six men. The pilot had been burned to death, and the fifth crew member had hidden himself somewhere. The German Security Police came to pick up the four remaining men, none of whom were injured. After parachuting out of a flaming plane, how can anyone have such presence of mind?

Although it's undeniably hot, we have to light a fire every other day to burn our vegetable peelings and garbage. We can't throw anything into trash cans, because the warehouse employees might see it. One small act of carelessness and we're done for!

All college students are being asked to sign an official statement to the effect that they "sympathize with the Germans and approve of the New Order." Eighty percent have decided to obey the dictates of their conscience, but the penalty will be severe. Any student refusing to sign will be sent to a German labor camp. What's to become of the youth of our country if they've all got to do hard labor in Germany?

Last night the guns were making so much noise that Mother shut the window; I was in Pim's bed. Suddenly, right above our heads, we heard Mrs. van D. leap up, as if she'd been bitten by Mouschi. This was followed by a loud boom, which sounded as if a firebomb had landed beside my bed. "Lights! Lights!" I screamed.

Pim switched on the lamp. I expected the room to burst into flames any minute. Nothing happened. We all rushed upstairs to see what was going on. Mr. and Mrs. van D. had seen a red glow through the open window, and he thought there was a fire nearby, while she was certain our house was ablaze. Mrs. van D. was already standing beside her bed with her knees knocking when the boom came. Dussel stayed upstairs to smoke a cigarette, and we crawled back into bed. Less than fifteen minutes later the shooting started again. Mrs. van D. sprang out of bed and went downstairs to Dussel' s room to seek the comfort she was unable to find with her spouse. Dussel welcomed her with the words "Come into my bed, my child!"

We burst into peals of laughter, and the roar of the guns bothered us no more; our fears had all been swept away.

Yours, Anne

SUNDAY, JUNE 13, 1943

Dearest Kitty,

The poem Father composed for my birthday is too nice to keep to myself.

Since Pim writes his verses only in German, Margot volunteered to translate it into Dutch. See for yourself whether Margot hasn't done herself proud. It begins with the usual summary of the year's events and then continues:

As youngest among us, but small no more,
Your life can be trying, for we have the chore
Of becoming your teachers, a terrible bore. 
"We've got experience! Take it from me!" 
"We've done this all before, you see. 
We know the ropes, we know the same."
Since time immemorial, always the same.
One's own shortcomings are nothing but fluff,
But everyone else's are heavier stuff:
Faultfinding comes easy when this is our plight,
But it's hard for your parents, try as they might,
To treat you with fairness, and kindness as well;
Nitpicking's a habit that's hard to dispel.
Men you're living with old folks, all you can do
Is put up with their nagging -- it's hard but it's true.
The pill may be bitter, but down it must go,
For it's meant to keep the peace, you know.
The many months here have not been in vain,
Since wasting time noes against your Brain.
You read and study nearly all the day,
Determined to chase the boredom away.
The more difficult question, much harder to bear,
Is "What on earth do I have to wear?
I've got no more panties, my clothes are too tight,
My shirt is a loincloth, I'm really a siaht!
To put on my shoes I must off my toes,
Dh dear, I'm plagued with so many woes!"

Margot had trouble getting the part about food to rhyme, so I'm leaving it out. But aside from that, don't you think it's a good poem?

For the rest, I've been thoroughly spoiled and have received a number of lovely presents, including a big book on my favorite subject, Greek and Roman mythology. Nor can I complain about the lack of candy; everyone had dipped into their last reserves. As the Benjamin of the Annex, I got more than I deserve.

Yours, Anne

TUESDAY, JUNE 15, 1943

Dearest Kitty,

Heaps of things have happened, but I often think I'm boring you with my dreary chitchat and that you'd just as soon have fewer letters. So I'll keep the news brief.

Mr. Voskuijl wasn't operated on for his ulcer after all. Once the doctors had him on the operating table and opened him up, they saw that he had cancer. It was in such an advanced stage that an operation was pointless. So they stitched him up again, kept him in the hospital for three weeks, fed him well and sent him back home. But they made an unforgivable error: they told the poor man exactly what was in store for him. He can't work anymore, and he's just sitting at home, surrounded by his eight children, brooding about his approaching death. I feel very sorry for him and hate not being able to go out; otherwise, I'd visit him as often as I could and help take his mind off matters. Now the good man can no longer let us know what's being said and done in the warehouse, which is a disaster for us. Mr. Voskuijl was our greatest source of help and suppor when it came to safety measures. We miss him very much.

Next month it's our turn to hand over our radio to the authorities. Mr. Kleiman  has a small set hidden in his home that he's giving us to replace our beautiful cabinet radio. It's a pity we have to turn in our big Philips, but when you're in hiding, you can't afford to bring the authorities down on your heads. Of course, we'll put the "baby" radio upstairs. What's a clandestine radio when there are already clandestine Jews and clandestine money?

All over the country people are trying to get hold of an old radio that they can hand over instead of their "morale booster." It's true: as the reports from outside grow worse and worse, the radio, with its wondrous voice, helps us not to lose heart and to keep telling ourselves, "Cheer up, keep your spirits high, things are bound to get better!"

Yours, Anne

SUNDAY, JULY 11, 1943

Dear Kitty,

To get back to the subject of child-rearing (for the umpteenth time), let me tell you that I'm doing my best to be helpful, friendly and kind and to do all I can to keep the rain of rebukes down to a light drizzle. It's not easy trying to behave like a model child with people you can't stand, especially when you don't mean a word of it. But I can see that a little hypocrisy gets me a lot further than myoid method of saying exactly what I think (even though no one ever asks my opinion or cares one way or another). Of course, I often forget my role and find it impossible to curb my anger when they're unfair, so that they spend the next month saying the most impertinent girl in the world. Don't you think I'm to be pitied sometimes? It's a good thing I'm not the grouchy type, because then I might become sour and bad-tempered. I can usually see the humorous side of their scoldings, but it's easier when somebody else is being raked over the coals.

Further, I've decided (after a great deal of thought) to drop the shorthand. First, so that I have more time for my other subjects, and second, because of my eyes. That's a sad story. I've become very nearsighted and should have had glasses ages ago. (Ugh, won't I look like a dope!). But as you know, people in hiding can't. . .

Yesterday all anyone here could talk about was Anne's eyes, because Mother had suggested I go to the ophthalmologist with Mrs. Kleiman. Just hearing this made my knees weak, since it's no small matter. Going outside! Just think of it, walking down the street! I can't imagine it. I was petrified at first, and then glad. But it's not as simple as all that; the various authorities who had to approve such a step were unable to reach a quick  decision. They first had to carefully weigh all the difficulties and risks, though Miep was ready to set off immediately with me in tow. In the meantime, I'd taken my gray coat from the closet, but it was so small it looked as if it might have belonged to my little sister. We lowered the hem, but I still couldn't button it. I'm really curious to see what they decide, only I don't think they'll ever work out a plan, because the British have landed in Sicily and Father's all set for a "quick finish."

Bep's been giving Margot and me a lot of office work to do. It makes us both feel important, and it's a big help to her. Anyone can file letters and make entries in a sales book, but we do it with remarkable accuracy.

Miep has so much to carry she looks like a pack mule. She goes forth nearly every day to scrounge up vegetables, and then bicycles back with her purchases in large shopping bags. She's also the one who brings five library books with her every Saturday. We long for Saturdays because that means books. We're like a bunch of little kids with a present. Ordinary people don't know how much books can mean to someone who's cooped up.

Our only diversions are reading, studying and listening to the radio.

Yours, Anne

TUESDAY, JULY 13, 1943

The Best Little Table

Yesterday afternoon Father gave me permission to ask Mr. Dussel whether he would please be so good as to allow me (see how polite I am?) to use the table in our room two afternoons a week, from four to five-thirty. I already sit there every day from two-thirty to four while Dussel takes a nap, but the rest of the time the room and the table are off-limits to me. It's impossible to study next door in the afternoon, because there's too much going on. Besides, Father sometimes likes to sit at the desk during the afternoon.

So it seemed like a reasonable request, and I asked Dussel very politely. What do you think the learned gentleman's reply was? "No." Just plain "No!"

I was incensed and wasn't about to let myself be put off like that. I asked him the reason for his "No," but this didn't get me anywhere. The gist of his reply was: "I have to study too, you know, and if I can't do that in the afternoons, I won't be able to fit it in at all. I have to finish the task I've set for myself; otherwise, there's no point in starting. Besides, you aren't serious about your studies. Mythology -- what kind of work is that? Reading and knitting don't count either. I use that table and I'm not going to give it up!" 

I replied, "Mr. Dussel, I do take my wsork seriously. I can't study next door in the afternoons, and I would appreciate it if you would reconsider my request!"

Having said these words, the insulted Anne turned around and pretended the learned doctor wasn't there. I was seething with rage and felt that Dussel had been incredibly rude (which he certainly had been) and that I'd been very polite. 

That evening, when I managed to get hold of Pim, I told him what had happened and we discussed what my next step should be, because I had no intention of giving up and preferred to deal with the matter myself. Pim gave me a rough idea of how to approach Dussel, but cautioned me to wait until the next day, since I was in such a flap. I ignored this last piece of advice and waited for Dussel after the dishes had been done. Pim was sitting next door and that had a calming effect.

I began, "Mr. Dussel, you seem to believe further discussion of the matter is pointless, but I beg you to reconsider."

Dussel gave me his most charming smile and said, "I'm always prepared to discuss the matter, even though it's already been settled."

I went on talking, despite Dussel's repeated interruptions. When you first came here," I said, "we agreed that the room was to be shared by the two of us. If we were to divide it fairly, you'd have the entire morning and I'd have the entire afternoon! I'm not asking for that much, but two afternoons a week does seem reasonable to me."

Dussel leapt out of his chair as if he'd sat on a pin. "You have no business talking about your rights to the room. Where am I supposed to go? Maybe I should ask Mr. van Daan to build me a cubbyhole in the attic. You're not the only one who can't find a quiet place to work. You're always looking for a fight. If your sister Margot, who has more right to work space than you do, had come to me with the same request, I'd never even have thought of refusing, but you. . ."

And once again he brought up the business about the mythology and the knitting, and once again Anne was insulted. However, I showed no sign of it and let Dussel finish: "But no, it's impossible to talk to you. You're shamefully self-centered. No one else matters, as long as you get your way. I've never seen such a child. But after all is said and done, I'll be obliged to let you have your way, since I don't want people saying later on that Anne Frank failed her exams because Mr. Dussel refused to relinquish his table!"

He went on and on until there was such a deluge of words I could hardly keep up. For one fleeting moment I thought, "Him and his lies. I'll smack his ugly mug so hard he'll go bouncing off the wall!" But the next moment I thought, "Calm down, he's not worth getting so upset about!"

At long last Mr. Dussel' s fury was spent, and he left the room with an expression of triumph mixed with wrath, his coat pockets bulging with food.

I went running over to Father and recounted the entire story, or at least those parts he hadn't been able to follow himself. rim decided to talk to Dussel that very same evening, and they spoke for more than half an hour.

They first discussed whether Anne should be allowed to use the table, yes or no. Father said that he and Dussel had dealt with the subject once before, at which time he'd professed to agree with Dussel because he didn't want to contradict the elder in front of the younger, but that, even then, he hadn't thought it was fair. Dussel felt I had no right to talk as if he were an intruder laying claim to everything in sight. But Father protested strongly, since he himself had heard me say nothing of the kind. And so the conversation went back and forth, with Father defending my "selfishness" and my "busywork" and Dussel grumbling the whole time.

Dussel finally had to give in, and I was granted the opportunity to work without interruption two afternoons a week. Dussel looked very sullen, didn't speak to me for two days and made sure he occupied the table from five to five-thirty -- all very childish, of course.

Anyone who's so petty and pedantic at the age of fifty-four was born that way and is never going to change.

FRIDAY, JULY 16, 1943

Dearest Kitty,

There's been another break-in, but this time a real one! Peter went down to the warehouse this morning at seven, as usual, and noticed at once that both the warehouse door and the street door were open. He immediately reported this to Pim, who went to the private office, tuned the radio to a German station and locked the door. Then they both went back upstairs. In such cases our orders are not to wash ourselves or run any water, to be quiet, to be dressed by eight and not to go to the bathroom," and as usual we followed these to the letter. We were all glad we'd slept so well and hadn't heard anything. For a while we were indignant because no one from the office came upstairs the entire morning; Mr. Kleiman left us on tenterhooks until eleven-thirty. He told that the burglars had forced the outside door and the warehouse door with a crowbar, but when they didn't find anything worth stealing, they tried their luck on the next floor. They stole two cashboxes containing 40 guilders, blank checkbooks and, worst of all, coupons for 330 pounds of sugar, our entire allotment. It won't be easy to wangle new ones.

Mr. Kugler thinks this burglar belongs to the same gang as the one who made an unsuccessful attempt six weeks ago to open all three doors (the warehouse door and the two outside doors).

The burglary caused another stir, but the Annex seems to thrive on excitement. Naturally, we were glad the cash register and the typewriters had been safely tucked away in our clothes closet.

Yours, Anne

PS. Landing in Sicily. Another step closer to the . . . !

MONDAY, JULY 19,1943

Dearest Kitty,

North Amsterdam was very heavily bombed on Sunday. There was apparently a great deal of destruction. Entire streets are in ruins, and it will take a while for them to dig out all the bodies. So far there have been two hundred dead and countless wounded; the hospitals are bursting at the seams. We've been told of children searching forlornly in the smoldering ruins for their dead parents. It still makes me shiver to think of the dull, distant drone that signified the approaching destruction.

FRIDAY, JULY 23, 1943

Bep is currently able to get hold of notebooks, especially journals and ledgers, useful for my bookkeeping sister! Other kinds are for sale as well, but don't ask what they're like or how long they'll last. At the moment \ they're all labeled "No Coupons Needed!" Like everything else you can purchase without ration stamps, they're i totally worthless. They consist of twelve sheets of gray I paper with narrow lines that slant across the page. Margot is thinking about taking a course in calligraphy; I've advised her to go ahead and do it. Mother won't let me because of my eyes, but I think that's silly. Whether I do I that or something else, it all comes down to the same I thing.

Since you've never been through a war, Kitty, and since you know very little about life in hiding, in spite of my letters, let me tell you, just for fun, what we each want to do first when we're able to go outside again.

Margot and Mr. van Daan wish, above all else, to have a hot bath, filled to the brim, which they can lie in for more than half an hour. Mrs. van Daan would like a cake, Dussel can think of nothing but seeing his Charlotte, and Mother is dying for a cup of real coffee. Father would like to visit Mr. Voskuijl, Peter would go downtown, and as for me, I'd be so overjoyed I wouldn't know where to begin.

Most of all I long to have a home of our own, to be able to move around freely and have someone help me with my homework again, at last. In other words, to go back to school!

Bep has offered to get us some fruit, at so-called bargain prices: grapes 2.50 guilders a pound, gooseberries 70 cents a pound, one peach 50 cents, melons 75 cents a pound. No wonder the papers write every evening in big, fat letters: "Keep Prices Down!"

MONDAY, JULY 26, 1943

Dear Kitty,

Yesterday was a very tumultuous day, and we're still all wound up. Actually, you may wonder if there's ever a day that passes without some kind of excitement.

The first warning siren went off in the morning while we were at breakfast, but we paid no attention, because it only meant that the planes were crossing the coast. I had a terrible headache, so I lay down for an hour after breakfast and then went to the office at around two.

At two-thirty Margot had finished her office work and was just gathering her things together when the sirens began wailing again. So she and I trooped back upstairs. None too soon, it seems, for less than five minutes later the guns were booming so loudly that we went and stood in the hall. The house shook and the bombs kept falling. I was clutching my "escape bag," more because I wanted to have something to hold on to than because I wanted to run away. I know we can't leave here, but if we had to, being seen on the streets would be just as dangerous as getting caught in an air raid. After half an hour the drone of engines faded and the house began to hum with activity again. Peter emerged from his lookout post in the front attic, Dussel remained in the front office, Mrs. van D. felt safest in the private office, Mr. van Daan had been watching from the loft, and those of us on the landing spread out to watch the columns of smoke rising from the harbor. Before long the smell of fire was everywhere, and outside it looked as if the city were enveloped in a thick fog.

A big fire like that is not a pleasant sight, but fortunately for us it was all over, and we went baCk to our various chores. Just as we were starting dinner: another air-raid alarm. The food was good, but I lost my appetite the moment I heard the siren. Nothing happened, however, and forty-five minutes later the all clear was sounded. After the dishes had been washed: another air-raid warning, gunfire and swarms of planes. "Oh, gosh, twice in one day," we thought, "that's twice in one day," we thought, "that's twice too many." Little good that did us, because once agai the bombs rained down, this time on the others of the city. According to British reports, Schiphol Airport was bombed. The planes dived and climbed, the air was abuzz with the drone of engines. It was very scary, and the whole time I kept thinking, "Here it comes, this is it."

I can assure you that when I went to bed at nine, my legs were still shaking. At the stroke of midnight I woke up again: more planes! Dussel was undressing, but I took no notice and leapt up, wide awake, at the sound of the first shot. I stayed in Father's bed until one, in my own bed until one-thirty, and was back in Father's bed at two. But the planes kept on coming. At last they stopped firing and I was able to go back "home" again. I finally fell asleep at half past two.

Seven o'clock. I awoke with a start and sat up in bed. Mr. van Daan was with Father. My first thought was: burglars. "Everything," I heard Mr. van Daan say, and I thought everything had been stolen. But no, this time it was wonderful news, the best we've had in months, maybe even since the war began. Mussolini has resigned and the King of Italy has taken over the government.

We jumped for joy. After the awful events of yesterday, finally something good happens and brings us. . . hope! Hope for an end to the war, hope for peace.

Mr. Kugler dropped by and told us that the Fokker aircraft factory had been hit hard. Meanwhile, there was another air-raid alarm this morning, with planes flying over, and another warning siren. I've had it up to here with alarms. I've hardly slept, and the last thing I want to do is work. But now the suspense about Italy and the hope that the war will be over by the end of the year are keeping us awake. .

Yours, Anne

THURSDAY, JULY 29, 1943

Dearest Kitty,

Mrs. van Daan, Dussel and I were doing the dishes, and I was extremely quiet. This is very unusual for me and they were sure to notice, so in order to avoid any questions, I quickly racked my brains for a neutral topic. I thought the book Henry from Across the Street might fit the bill, but I couldn't have been more wrong; if Mrs. van Daan doesn't jump down my throat, Mr. Dussel does. It all boiled down to this: Mr. Dussel had recommended the book to Margot and me as an example of excellent writing. We thought it was anything but that. The little boy had been portrayed well, but as for the rest. . . the less said the better. I mentioned something to that effect while we were doing the dishes, and Dussel launched into a veritable tirade.

"How can you possibly understand the psychology of a man? That of a child isn't so difficult [!]. But you're far too young to read a book like that. Even a twenty-year-old man would be unable to comprehend it." (So why did he go out of his way to recommend it to Margot and me?)

Mrs. van D. and Dussel continued their harangue: "You know way too much about things you're not supposed to. You've been brought up all wrong. Later on, when you're older, you won't be able to enjoy anything anymore. You'll say, 'Oh, I read that twenty years ago in some book.' You'd better hurry if you want to catch a husband or fall in love, since everything is bound to be a disappointment to you. You already know all there is to know in theory. But in practice? That's another story!"

Can you imagine how I felt? I astonished myself by calmly replying, "You may think I haven't been raised properly, but many people would disagree!"

They apparently believe that good child-rearing includes trying to pit me against my parents, since that's all they ever do. And not telling a girl my age about grown-up subjects is fine. We can all see what happens when. people are raised that way. 

At that moment I could have slapped them both for poking fun at me. I was beside myself with rage, and if I only knew how much longer we had to put up with each other's company, I'd start counting the days.

Mrs. van Daan's a fine one to talk! She sets an example all right -- a bad one! She's known to be exceedingly pushy, egotistical, cunning, calculating and perpetually dissatisfied. Add to that, vanity and coquettishness and there's no question about it: she's a thoroughly despicable person. I could write an entire book about Madame van Daan, and who knows, maybe someday I will. Anyone can put on a charming exterior when they want to. Mrs. van D. is friendly to strangers, especially men, so it's easy to make a mistake when you first get to know her.

Mother thinks that Mrs. van D. is too stupid for words, Margot that she's too unimportant, Pim that she's too ugly (literally and figuratively!), and after long observation (I'm never prejudiced at the beginning), I've come to the conclusion that she's all three of the above, and lots more besides. She has so many bad traits, why should I single out just one of them?

Yours, Anne

P.S. Will the reader please take into consideration that this story was written before the writer's fury had cooled?

TUESDAY, AUGUST 3, 1943

Dearest Kitty,

Things are going well on the political front. Italy has banned the Fascist Party. The people are fighting the Fascists in many places -- even the army has joined the fight. How can a country like that continue to wage war against England? 

Our beautiful radio was taken away last week. Dussel was very angry at Mr. Kugler for turning it in on the appointed day. Dussel is slipping lower and lower in my estimation, and he's already below zero. hatever he says about politics, history, geography or ything else is so ridiculous that I hardly dare repeat it: Hitler will fade from history; the harbor in Rotterdam is bigger than the one in Hamburg; the English are idiots for not taking the opportunity to bomb Italy to smithereens; etc., etc.

We just had a third air raid. I decided to grit my teeth and practice being courageous.

Mrs. van Daan, the one who always said "Let them fall" and "Better to end with a bang than not to end at all," is the most cowardly one among us. She was shaking like a leaf this morning and even burst into tears. She was comforted by her husband, with whom she recently declared a truce after a week of squabbling; I nearly got sentimental at the sight.

Mouschi has now proved, beyond a shadow of a doubt, that having a cat has disadvantages as well as advantages. The whole house is crawling with fleas, and it's getting worse each day. Mr. Kleiman sprinkled yellow powder in every nook and cranny, but the fleas haven't taken the slightest notice. It's making us all very jittery; we're forever imagining a bite on our arms and legs or other parts of our bodies, so we leap up and do a few exercises, since it gives us an excuse to take a better look at our arms or necks. But now we're paying the price for having had so little physical exercise; we're so stiff we can hardly turn our heads. The real calisthenics fell by the wayside long ago.

Yours, Anne

WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 4,1943

Dearest Kitty,

Now that we've been in hiding for a little over a year, you know a great deal about our lives. Still, I can't possibly tell you everything, since it's all so different compared to ordinary times and ordinary people. Nevertheless, to give you a closer look into our lives, from time to time I'll describe part of an ordinary day. I'll start with the evening and night.

Nine in the evening. Bedtime always begins in the Annex with an enormous hustle and bustle. Chairs are shifted, beds pulled out, blankets unfolded -- nothing stays where it is during the daytime. I sleep on a small divan, which is only five feet long, so we have to add a few chairs to make it longer. Comforter, sheets, pillows, blankets: everything has to be removed from Dussel' s bed, where it's kept during the day.

In the next room there's a terrible creaking: that's Margot's folding bed being set up. More blankets and pillows, anything to make the wooden slats a bit more comfortable. Upstairs it sounds like thunder, but it's only Mrs. van D.'s bed being shoved against the window so that Her Majesty, arrayed in her pink bed jacket, can sniff the night air through her delicate little nostrils.

Nine o'clock. After Peter's finished, it's my turn for the bathroom. I wash myself from head to toe, and more often than not I find a tiny flea floating in the sink (only during the hot months, weeks or days). I brush my teeth, curl my hair, manicure my nails and dab peroxide on my upper lip to bleach the black hairs -- all this in less than half an hour.

Nine-thirty. I throw on my bathrobe. With soap in one hand, and potty, hairpins, panties, curlers and a wad of cotton in the other, I hurry out of the bathroom. The next in line invariably calls me back to remove the gracefully curved but unsightly hairs that I've left in the sink.

Ten o'clock. Time to put up the blackout screen and say good-night. For the next fifteen minutes, at least, the house is filled with the creaking of beds and the sigh of broken springs, and then, provided our upstairs neighbors aren't having a marital spat in bed, all is quiet.

Eleven-thirty. The bathroom door creaks. A narrow strip of light falls into the room. Squeaking shoes, a large coat, even larger than the man inside it . . . Dussel is returning from his nightly work in Mr. Kugler's office. I hear him shuffiing back and forth for ten whole minutes, the rustle of paper (from the food he's tucking away in his cupboard) and the bed being made up. Then the figure disappears again, and the only sound is the occasional suspicious noise from the bathroom.

Approximately three o'clock. I have to get up to use the tin can under my bed, which, to be on the safe side, has a rubber mat underneath in case of leaks. I always hold my breath while I go, since it clatters into the can like a brook down a mountainside. The potty is returned to its place, and the figure in the white nightgown (the one that causes Margot to exclaim every evening, "Oh, that indecent nighty!") climbs back into bed. A certain somebody lies awake for about fifteen minutes, listening to the sounds of the night. In the first place, to hear whether there are any burglars downstairs, and then to the various beds -- upstairs, next door and in my room -- to tell whether the others are asleep or half awake. This is no fun, especially when it concerns a member of the family named Dr. Dussel. First, there's the sound of a fish gasping for air, and this is repeated nine or ten times. Then, the lips are moistened profusely. This is alternated with little smacking sounds, followed by a long period of tossing and turning and rearranging the pillows. After five minutes of perfect quiet, the same sequence repeats itself three more times, after which he's presumably lulled himself back to sleep for a while.

Sometimes the guns go off during the night, between one and four. I'm never aware of it before it happens, but all of a sudden I find myself standing beside my bed, out of sheer habit. Occasionally I'm dreaming so deeply (of irregular French verbs or a quarrel upstairs) that I realize only when my dream is over that the shooting has stopped and that I've remained quietly in my room. But usually I wake up. Then I grab a pillow and a handkerchief, throw on my robe and slippers and dash next door to Father, just the way Margot described in this birthday poem:

When shots rino out in the dark of night,
The door creaks open and into sight
Come a hanky, a pillow, a figure in white. . .

Once I've reached the big bed, the worst is over, except when the shooting is extra loud.

Six forty-five. Brrring . . . the alarm clock, which raises its shrill voice at any hour of the day or night, whether you want it to or not. Creak. . . wham. . . Mrs. van D. turns it off. Screak . . . Mr. van D. gets up, puts on the water and races to the bathroom.

Seven-fifteen. The door creaks again. Dussel can go to the bathroom. Alone at last, I remove the blackout screen . . . and a new day begins in the Annex.

Yours, Anne

THURSDAY, AUGUST 5, 1943

Dearest Kitty,

Today let's talk about the lunch break.

It's twelve-thirty. The whole gang breathes a sigh of relief: Mr. van Maaren, the man with the shady past, and

Mr. de Kok have gone home for lunch.

Upstairs you can hear the thud of the vacuum cleaner on Mrs. van D.'s beautiful and only rug. Margot tucks a few books under her arm and heads for the class for "slow learners," which is what Dussel seems to be. Pim goes and sits in a corner with his constant companion, Dickens, in hopes of finding a bit of peace and quiet. Mother hastens upstairs to help the busy little housewife, and I tidy up both the bathroom and myself at the same time.

Twelve forty-five. One by one they trickle in: first Mr.

Gies and then either Mr. Kleiman or Mr. Kugler, followed by Bep and sometimes even Miep.

One. Clustered around the radio, they all listen raptly to the BBC. This is the only time the members of the Annex family don't interrupt each other, since even Mr. van Daan can't argue with the speaker.

One-fifteen. Food distribution. Everyone from downstairs gets a cup of soup, plus dessert, if there happens to be any. A contented Mr. Gies sits on the divan or leans against the desk with his newspaper, cup and usually the cat at his side. If one of the three is missing, he doesn't hesitate to let his protest be heard. Mr. Kleiman relates the latest news from town, and he's an excellent source. Mr. Kugler hurries up the stairs, gives a short but solid knock on the door and comes in either wringing his hands or rubbing them in glee, depending on whether he's quiet and in a bad mood or talkative and in a good mood.

One forty-five. Everyone rises from the table and goes about their business. Margot and Mother do the dishes, Mr. and Mrs. van D. head for the divan, Peter for the attic, Father for his divan, Dussel too, and Anne does her homework.

What comes next is the quietest hour of the day; when they're all asleep, there are no disturbances. To judge by his face, Dussel is dreaming of food. But I don't look at him long, because the time whizzes by and before you know it, it'll be 4 P.M. and the pedantic Dr. Dussel will be standing with the clock in his hand because I'm one minute ,late clearing off the table.

Yours, Anne

SATURDAY, AUGUST 7, 1943

Dearest Kitty,

A few weeks ago I started writing a story, something I made up from beginning to end, and I've enjoyed it so much that the products of my pen are piling up.

Yours, Anne

MONDAY, AUGUST 9, 1943

Dearest Kitty,

We now continue with a typical day in the Annex. Since we've already had lunch, it's time to describe dinner.

Mr. van Daan. Is served first, and takes a generous portion of whatever he likes. Usually joins in the conversation, never fails to give his opinion. Once he's spoken, his word is final. If anyone dares to suggest otherwise, Mr. van D. can put up a good fight. Oh, he can hiss like a cat. . . but I'd rather he didn't. Once you've seen it, you never want to see it again. His opinion is the best, he knows the most about everything. Granted, the man has a good head on his shoulders, but it's swelled to no small degree.

Madame. Actually, the best thing would be to say nothing. Some days, especially when a foul mood is on the way, her face is hard to read. If you analyze the discussions, you realize she's not the subject, but the guilty party! A fact everyone prefers to ignore. Even so, you could call her the instigator. Stirring up trouble, now that's what Mrs. van Daan calls fun. Stirring up trouble between Mrs. Frank and Anne. Margot and Mr. Frank aren t qwte as easy.

But let's return to the table. Mrs. van D. may think she doesn't always get enough, but that's not the case. The choicest potatoes, the tastiest morsel, the tenderest bit of whatever there is, that's Madame's motto. The others can all have their turn, as long as I get the best. (Exactly what she accuses Anne Frank of doing.) Her second watchword is: keep talking. As long as somebody's listening, it doesn't seem to occur to her to wonder whether they're interested. She must think that whatever Mrs. van Daan says will interest everyone.

Smile coquettishly, pretend you know everything, offer everyone a piece of advice and mother them -- that's sure to make a good impression. But if you take a better look, the good impression fades. One, she's hardworking; two, cheerful; three, coquettish -- and sometimes a cute face. That's Petronella van Daan.

The third diner. Says very little. Young Mr. van Daan is usually quiet and hardly makes his presence known. As far as his appetite is concerned, he's a Danaldean vessel that never gets full. Even after the most substantial meal, he can look you calmly in the eye and claim he could have eaten twice as much.

Number four -- Margot. Eats like a bird and doesn't talk at all. She eats only vegetables and fruit. "Spoiled," in the opinion of the van Daans. "Too little exercise and fresh air," in ours.

Beside her -- Mama. Has a hearty appetite, does her share of the talking. No one has the impression, as they do with Mrs. van Daan, that this is a housewife. What's the difference between the two? Well, Mrs. van D. does the cooking and Mother does the dishes and polishes the furniture. 

Numbers six and seven. I won't say much about Father and me. The former is the most modest person at the table. He always looks to see whether the others have been served first. He needs nothing for himself; the best things are for the children. He's goodness personified. Seated next to him is the Annex's little bundle of nerves.

Dussel. Help yourself, keep your eyes on the food, eat and don't talk. And if you have to say something, then for goodness' sake talk about food. That doesn't lead to quarrels, just to bragging. He consumes enormous portions, and "no" is not part of his vocabulary, whether the food is good or bad.

Pants that come up to his chest, a red jacket, black patent-leather slippers and horn-rimmed glasses -- that's how he looks when he's at work at the little table, always studying and never progressing. This is interrupted only by his afternoon nap, food and -- his favorite spot -- the bathroom. Three, four or five  times a day there's bound to be someone waiting outside the bathroom door, hopping impatiently from one foot to another, trying to hold it in and barely managing. Does Dussel care? Not a whit. From seven-fifteen to seven-thirty, from twelve-thirty to one, from two to two-fifteen, from four to four-fifteen, from six to six-fifteen, from eleven-thirty to twelve. You can set your watch by them; these are the times for his "regular sessions." He never deviates or lets himself be swayed by the voices outside the door, begging him to open up before a disaster occurs.

Number nine is not part of our Annex family, although she does share our house and table. Hep has a healthy appetite. She cleans her plate and isn't choosy. Hep's easy to please and that pleases us. She can be characterized as follows: cheerful, good-humored, kind and willing.

TUESDAY, AUGUST 10, 1943

Dearest Kitty, .

A new idea: during meals I talk more to myself than to the others, which has two advantages. First, they're glad they don't have to listen to my continuous chatter, and second, I don't have to get annoyed by their opinions. I don't think my opinions are stupid but other people do, so it's better to keep them to myself. I apply the same tactic when I have to eat something I loathe. I put the dish in front of me, pretend it's delicious, avoid looking at it as much as possible, and it's gone before I've had time to realize what it is. When I get up in the morning, another very disagreeable moment, I leap out of bed, think to myself, "You'll be slipping back under the covers soon," walk to the window, take down the blackout screen, sniff at the crack until I feel a bit of fresh air, and I'm awake. I strip the bed as fast as I can so I won't be tempted to get back in. Do you know what Mother calls this sort of thing? The art of living. Isn't that a funny expression?

We've all been a little confused this past week because our dearly beloved Westertoren bells have been carted off to be melted down for the war, so we have no idea of the exact time, either night or day. I still have hopes that they'll come up with a substitute, made of tin or copper or some such thing, to remind the neighborhood of the clock.

Everywhere I go, upstairs or down, they all cast admiring glances at my feet, which are adorned by a pair of exceptionally beautiful (for times like these!) shoes. Miep managed to snap them up for 27.50 guilders. Burgundy-colored suede and leather with medium-sized high heels. I feel as if I were on stilts, and look even taller than I already am.

Yesterday was my unlucky day. I pricked my right thumb with the blunt end of a big needle. As a result, Margot had to peel potatoes for me (take the good with the bad), and writing was awkward. Then I bumped into the cupboard door so hard it nearly knocked me over, and was scolded for making such a racket. They wouldn't let me run water to bathe my forehead, so now I'm walking around with a giant lump over my right eye. To make matters worse, the little toe on my right foot got stuck in the vacuum cleaner. It bled and hurt, but my other ailments were already causing me so much trouble that I let this one slide, which was stupid of me, because now I'm walking around with an infected toe. What with the salve, the gauze and the tape, I can't get my heavenly new shoe on my foot.

Dussel has put us in danger for the umpteenth time. He actually had Miep bring him a book, an anti-Mussolini tirade, which has been banned. On the way here she was knocked down by an SS motorcycle. She lost her head and shouted "You brutes!" and went on her way. I don't dare think what would have happened if she'd been taken down to headquarters.

Yours, Anne

A Daily Chore in Our Little Community: Peeling Potatoes!

One person goes to get some newspapers; another, the knives (keeping the best for himself, of course); the third, the potatoes; and the fourth, the water.

Mr. Dussel begins. He may not always peel them very well, but he does peel nonstop, glancing left and right to see if everyone is doing it the way he does. No, they're not! 

"Look, Anne, I am taking peeler in my hand like so and going from the top to bottom! Nein, not so . . . but so!"

"I think my way is easier, Mr. Dussel," I say tentatively.

"But this is best way, Anne. This you can take from me. Of course, it is no matter, you do the way you want."

We go on peeling. I glance at Dussel out of the corner of my eye. Lost in thought, he shakes his head (over me, no doubt), but says no more.

I keep on peeling. Then I look at Father, on the other side of me. To Father, peeling potatoes is not a chore, but precision work. When he reads, he has a deep wrinkle in the back of his head. But when he's preparing potatoes, beans or vegetables, he seems to be totally absorbed in his task. He puts on his potato-peeling face, and when it's set in that particular way, it would be impossible for him to turn out anything less than a perfectly peeled potato.

I keep on working. I glance up for a second, but that's all the time I need. Mrs. van D. is trying to attract Dussel's attention. She starts by looking in his direction, but Dussel pretends not to notice. She winks, but Dussel goes on peeling. She laughs, but Dussel still doesn't look up. Then Mother laughs too, but Dussel pays them no mind. Having failed to achieve her goal, Mrs. van D. is obliged to change tactics. There's a brief silence. Then she says, "Putti, why don't you put on an apron? Otherwise, I'll have to spend all day tomorrow trying to get the spots out of your suit!"

"I'm not getting it dirty."

Another brief silence. "Putti, why don't you sit down?' 

"I'm fine this way. I like standing up!" 

Silence.

"Putti, look out, du spritzt schon!".* [*Now you're splashing!]

"I know, Mommy, but I'm being careful."

Mrs. van D. casts about for another topic. "Tell me, Putti, why aren't the British carrying out any bombing raids today?"

"Because the weather's bad, Kerli!"

"But yesterday it was such nice weather and they weren't flying then either."

"Let's drop the subject."

"Why? Can't a person talk about that or offer an opinion?' 

"Well, why in the world not?"

"Oh, be quiet, Mammichen!"* [*Mommy]

"Mr. Frank always answers his wife."

Mr. van D. is trying to control himself. This remark always rubs him the wrong way, but Mrs. van D.'s not one to quit: "Oh, there's never going to be an invasion!" 

Mr. van D. turns white, and when she notices it, Mrs. van D. turns red, but she's not about to be deterred: "The British aren't doing a thing!" 

The bomb bursts. "And now shut up, Donnerwetter noch mal!* [*For crying out loud!"]

Mother can barely stifle a laugh, and I stare straight ahead.

Scenes like these are repeated almost daily, unless they've just had a terrible fight. In that case, neither Mr. nor Mrs. van D. says a word.

It's time for me to get some more potatoes. I go up to the attic, where Peter is busy picking fleas from the cat.

He looks up, the cat notices it, and whoosh. . . he's gone. Out the window and into the rain gutter.

Peter swears; I laugh and slip out of the room.

Freedom in the Annex

Five-thirty. Bep's arrival signals the beginning of our nightly freedom. Things get going right away. I go upstairs with Bep, who usually has her dessert before the rest of us. The moment she sits down, Mrs. van D. begins stating her wishes. Her list usually starts with "Oh, by the way, Bep, something else I'd like. . ." Bep winks at me. Mrs. van D. doesn't miss a chance to make her wishes known to whoever comes upstairs. It must be one of the reasons none of them like to go up there.

Five forty-five. Bep leaves. I go down two floors to have a look around: first to the kitchen, then to the private office and then to the coal bin to open the cat door for Mouschi.

After a long tour of inspection, I wind up in Mr. Kugler's office. Mr. van Daan is combing all the drawers and files for today's mail. Peter picks up Boche and the warehouse key; Pim lugs the typewriters upstairs; Margot looks around for a quiet place to do her office work; Mrs. van D. puts a kettle of water on the stove; Mother comes down the stairs with a pan of potatoes; we all know our jobs.

Soon Peter comes back from the warehouse. The first question they ask him is whether he's remembered the bread. No, he hasn't. He crouches before the door to the front office to make himself as small as possible and crawls on his hands and knees to the steel cabinet, takes out the bread and starts to leave. At any rate, that's what he intends to do, but before he knows what's happened, Mouschi has jumped over him and gone to sit under the desk.

Peter looks all around him. Aha, there's the cat! He crawls back into the office and grabs the cat by the tail. Mouschi hisses, Peter sighs. What has he accomplished? Mouschi's now sitting by the window licking herself, very pleased at having escaped Peter's clutches. Peter has no choice but to lure her with a piece of bread. Mouschi takes the bait, follows him out, and the door closes.

I watch the entire scene through a crack in the door.

Mr. van Daan is angry and slams the door. Margot and I exchange looks and think the same thing: he must have worked himself into a rage again because of some blunder on Mr. Kugler's part, and he's forgotten all about the Keg Company next door.

Another step is heard in the hallway. Dussel comes in, goes toward the window with an air of propriety, sniffs. . . coughs, sneezes and clears his throat. He's out of luck -- it was pepper. He continues on to the front office. The curtains are open, which means he can't get at his writing paper. He disappears with a scowl.

Margot and I exchange another glance. "One less page for his sweetheart tomorrow," I hear her say. I nod in agreement.

An elephant's tread is heard on the stairway. It's Dussel, seeking comfort in his favorite spot.

We continue working. Knock, knock, knock. . . Three taps means dinnertime!

MONDAY, AUGUST 23, 1943

Wenn Die Uhr Halb Neune Schlaat . . .* [* When the clock strikes half past eight.]

Margot and Mother are nervous. "Shh . . . Father. Be quiet, Otto. Shh . . . Pim! It's eight-thirty.

Come here, you can't run the water anymore. Walk softly!" A sample of what's said to Father in the bathroom. At the stroke of half past eight, he has to be in the living room. No running water, no flushing toilet, no walking around, no noise whatsoever. As long as the office staff hasn't arrived, sounds travel more easily to the warehouse.

The door opens upstairs at eight-twenty, and this is followed by three gentle taps on the floor. . . Anne's hot cereal. I clamber up the stairs to get my doggie dish.

Back downstairs, everything has to be done quickly, quickly: I comb my hair, put away the potty, shove the bed back in place. Quiet! The clock is striking eight-thirty! Mrs. van D. changes shoes and shuffles through the room in her slippers; Mr. van D. too -- a veritable Charlie Chaplin. All is quiet.

The ideal family scene has now reached its high point. I want to read or study and Margot does too. Father and Mother ditto. Father is sitting (with Dickens and the dictionary, of course) on the edge of the sagging, squeaky bed, which doesn't even have a decent mattress. Two bolsters can be piled on top of each other. "I don't need these," he thinks. "I can manage without them!"

Once he starts reading, he doesn't look up. He laughs now and then and tries to get Mother to read a story. 

"I don't have the time right now!"

He looks disappointed, but then continues to read.

A little while later, when he comes across another good passage, he tries again: "You have to read this, Mother!"

Mother sits on the folding bed, either reading, sewing, knitting or studying, whichever is next on her list. An idea suddenly occurs to her, and she quickly says, so as not to forget, "Anne, remember to . . . Margot, jot this down. . . "

After a while it's quiet again. Margot slams her book shut; Father knits his forehead, his eyebrows forming a funny curve and his wrinkle of concentration reappearing I at the back of his head, and he buries himself in his book 1 again; Mother starts chatting with Margot; and I get curious and listen too. Pim is drawn into the conversation . . . Nine o'clock. Breakfast!

FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 10, 1943

Dearest Kitty,

Every time I write to you, something special has happened, usually unpleasant rather than pleasant. This time, however, something wonderful is going on.

On Wednesday, September 8, we were listening to the seven o'clock news when we heard an announcement: "Here is some of the best news of the war so far: Italy has capitulated." Italy has unconditionally surrendered! The Dutch broadcast from England began at eight-fifteen with the news: "Listeners, an hour and fifteen minutes ago, just as I finished writing my daily report, we received the wonderful news of Italy's capitulation. I tell you, I never tossed my notes into the wastepaper basket with more delight than I did today!"

"God Save the King," the American national anthem and the Russian' 'Internationale" were played. As always, the Dutch program was uplifting without being too optimistic.

The British have landed in Naples. Northern Italy is occupied by the Germans. The truce was signed on Friday, September 3, the day the British landed in Italy. The Germans are ranting and raving in all the newspapers at the treachery of Badoglio and the Italian king.

Still, there's bad news as well. It's about Mr. Kleiman. As you know, we all like him very much. He's unfailingly cheerful and amazingly brave, despite the fact that he's always sick and in pain and can't eat much or do a lot of walking. "When Mr. Kleiman enters a room, the sun begins to shine," Mother said recently, and she's absolutely right.

Now it seems he has to go to the hospital for a very difficult operation on his stomach, and will have to stay there for at least four weeks. You should have seen him when he told us good-bye. He acted so normally, as though he were just off to do an errand.

Yours, Anne

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 16, 1943

Dearest Kitty,

Relationships here in the Annex are getting worse all the time. We don't dare open our mouths at mealtime (except to slip in a bite of food), because no matter what we say, someone is bound to resent it or take it the wrong way. Mr. Voskuijl occasionally comes to visit us. Unfortunately, he's not doing very well. He isn't making it any easier for his family, because his attitude seems to be: what do I care, I'm going to die anyway! When I think how touchy everyone is here, I can just imagine what it must be like at the Voskuijls'.

I've been taking valerian every day to fight the anxiety and depression, but it doesn't stop me from being even more miserable the next day. A good hearty laugh would help better than ten valerian drops, but we've almost forgotten how to laugh. Sometimes I'm afraid my face is going to sag with all this sorrow and that my mouth is going to permanently droop at the corners. The others aren't doing any better. Everyone here is dreading the great terror known as winter.

Another fact that doesn't exactly brighten up our days is that Mr. van Maaren, the man who works in the warehouse, is getting suspicious about the Annex. A person with any brains must have noticed by now that Miep sometimes says she's going to the lab, Bep to the file room and Mr. Kleiman to the Opekta supplies, while Mr. Kugler claims the Annex doesn't belong to this building at all, but to the one next door.

We wouldn't care what Mr. van Maaren thought of the situation except that he's known to be unreliable and to possess a high degree of curiosity. He's not one who can be put off with a flimsy excuse.

One day Mr. Kugler wanted to be extra cautious, so at twenty past twelve he put on his coat and went to the drugstore around the corner. Less than five minutes later he was back, and he sneaked up the stairs like a thief to visit us. At one-fifteen he started to leave, but Bep met him on the landing and warned him that van Maaren was in the office. Mr. Kugler did an about-face and stayed with us until one-thirty. Then he took off his shoes and went in his stockinged feet (despite his cold) to the front attic and down the other stairway, taking one step at a time to avoid the creaks. It took him fifteen minutes to negotiate the stairs, but he wound up safely in the office after having entered from the outside.

In the meantime, Bep had gotten rid of van Maaren and come to get Mr. Kugler from the Annex. But he'd already left and at that moment was still tiptoeing down the stairs. What must the passersby have thought when they saw the manager putting on his shoes outside? Hey, you there, in the socks!

Yours, Anne

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 29, 1943

Dearest Kitty,

It's Mrs. van Daan's birthday. Other than one ration stamp each for cheese, meat and bread, all she received from us was a jar of jam. Her husband, Dussel and the office staff gave her nothing but flowers and also food. Such are the times we live in!

Bep had a nervous fit last week because she had so many errands to do. Ten times a day people were sending her out for something, each time insisting she go right away or go again or that she'd done it all wrong. And when you think that she has her regular office work to do, that Mr. Kleiman is sick, that Miep is home with a cold and that Bep herself has a sprained ankle, boyfriend troubles and a grouchy father, it's no wonder she's at the end of her tether. We comforted her and told her that if she'd put her foot down once or twice and say she didn't have the time, the shopping lists would shrink of their own accord.

Saturday there was a big drama, the likes of which have never been seen here before. It started with a discussion of van Maaren and ended in a general argument and tears. Dussel complained to Mother that he was being treated like a leper, that no one was friendly to him and that, after all, he hadn't done anything to deserve it. This was followed by a lot of sweet talk, which luckily Mother didn't fall for this time. She told him we were disappointed in him and that, on more than one occasion, he'd been a source of great annoyance. Dussel promised her the moon, but, as usual, we haven't seen so much as a beam.

There's trouble brewing with the van Daans, I can tell! Father's furious because they're cheating us: they've been holding back meat and other things. Oh, what kind of bombshell is about to burst now? If only I weren't so involved in all these skirmishes! If only I could leave here! They're driving us crazy!

Yours, Anne

SUNDAY, OCTOBER 17, 1943

Dearest Kitty,

Mr. Kleiman is back, thank goodness! He looks a bit pale, and yet he cheerfully set off to sell some clothes for Mr. van Daan. The disagreeable fact is that Mr. van Daan has run out of money. He lost his last hundred guilders in the warehouse, which is still creating trouble for us: the men are wondering how a hundred guilders could wind up in the warehouse on a Monday morning. Suspicion abounds. Meanwhile, the hundred guilders have been stolen. Who's the thief?

But I was talking about the money shortage. Mrs. van D. has scads of dresses, coats and shoes, none of which she feels she can do without. Mr. van D.'s suit is difficult to sell, and Peter's bike was put on the block, but is back again, since nobody wanted it. But the story doesn't end there. You see, Mrs. van D. is going to have to part with her fur coat. In her opinion, the firm should pay for our upkeep, but that's ridiculous. They just had a flaming row about it and have entered the "oh, my sweet Putti" and "darling Kerli" stage of reconciliation.

My mind boggles at the profanity this honorable house has had to endure in the past month. Father walks around with his lips pressed together, and whenever he hears his name, he looks up in alarm, as ifhe's afraid he'll be called upon to resolve another delicate problem. Mother's so wrought up her cheeks are blotched with red, Margot complains of headaches, Dussel can't sleep, Mrs. van D. frets and fumes all day long, and I've gone completely round the bend. To tell you the truth, I sometimes forget who we're at odds with and who we're not. The only way to take my mind off it is to study, and I've been doing a lot of that lately.

Yours, Anne

FRIDAY, OCTOBER 29,1943

My dearest Kitty,

Mr. Kleiman is out again; his stomach won't give him a moment's peace. He doesn't even know whether it's stopped bleeding. He came to tell us he wasn't feeling well and was going home, and for the first time he seemed really down.

Mr. and Mrs. van D. have had more raging battles. The reason is simple: they're broke. They wanted to sell an overcoat and a suit of Mr. van D. 's, but were unable to find any buyers. His prices were way too high.

Some time ago Mr. Kleiman was talking about a furrier he knows. This gave Mr. van D. the idea of selling his wife's fur coat. It's made of rabbit skin, and she's had it for seventeen years. Mrs. van D. got 325 guilders for it, an enormous amount. She wanted to keep the money herself to buy new clothes after the war, and it took some doing before Mr. van D. could make her understand that it was desperately needed to cover household expenses.

You can't imagine the screaming, shouting, stamping of feet and swearing that went on. It was terrifying. My family stood holding its breath at the bottom of the stairs, in case it might be necessary to drag them apart. All the bickering, tears and nervous tension have become such a stress and strain that I fall into my bed at night crying and thanking my lucky stars that I have half an hour to myself.

I'm doing fine, except I've got no appetite. I keep hearing: "Goodness, you look awful!" I must admit they're doing their best to keep me in condition: they're plying me with dextrose, cod-liver oil, brewer's yeast and calcium. My nerves often get the better of me, especially on Sundays; that's when I really feel miserable. The atmosphere is stifling, sluggish, leaden. Outside, you don't hear a single bird, and a deathly, oppressive silence hangs over the house and clings to me as if it were going to drag me into the deepest regions of the underworld. At times like these, Father, Mother and Margot don't matter to me in the least. I wander from room to room, climb up and down the stairs and feel like a songbird whose wings have been ripped off and who keeps hurling itself against the bars of its dark cage. "Let me out, where there's fresh air and laughter!" a voice within me cries. I don't even bother to reply anymore, but lie down on the divan. Sleep makes the silence and the terrible fear go by more quickly, helps pass the time, since it's impossible to kill it.

Yours, Anne

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 1943

Dearest Kitty,

To take our minds off matters as well as to develop them, Father ordered a catalog from a correspondence school. Margot pored through the thick brochure three times without finding anything to her liking and within her budget. Father was easier to satisfy and decided to write and ask for a trial lesson in "Elementary Latin." No sooner said than done. The lesson arrived, Margot set to work enthusiastically and decided to take the course, despite the expense. It's much too hard for me, though I'd really like to learn Latin.

To give me a new project as well, Father asked Mr. Kleiman for a children's Bible so I could finally learn something about the New Testament.

"Are you planning to give Anne a Bible for Hanukkah?" Margot asked, somewhat perturbed.

"Yes. . . Well, maybe St. Nicholas Day would be a better occasion," Father replied.

Jesus and Hanukkah don't exactly go together.

Since the vacuum cleaner's broken, I have to take an old brush to the rug every night. The window's closed, the light's on, the stove's burning, and there I am brushing away at the rug. "That's sure to be a problem," I thought to myself the first time. "There're bound to be complaints." I was right: Mother got a headache from the thick clouds of dust whirling around the room, Margot's new Latin dictionary was caked with dirt, and rim grumbled that the floor didn't look any different anyway. Small thanks for my pains.

We've decided that from now on the stove is going to be lit at seven-thirty on Sunday mornings instead of five-thirty. I think it's risky. What will the neighbors think of our smoking chimney?

It's the same with the curtains. Ever since we first went into hiding, they've been tacked firmly to the windows. Sometimes one of the ladies or gentlemen can't resist the urge to peek outside. The result: a storm of reproaches. The response: "Oh, nobody will notice." That's how every act of carelessness begins and ends. No one will notice, no one will hear, no one will pay the least bit of attention. Easy to say, but is it true?

At the moment, the tempestuous quarrels have subsided; only Dussel and the van Daans are still at loggerheads. When Dussel is talking about Mrs. van D., he invariably calls her' 'that old bat" or "that stupid hag," and conversely, Mrs. van D. refers to our ever so learned gentleman as an "old maid" or a "touchy neurotic spinster, etc.

The pot calling the kettle black!

Yours, Anne

MONDAY EVENING, NOVEMBER 8,1943

Dearest Kitty,

If you were to read all my letters in one sitting, you'd be struck by the fact that they were written in a variety of moods. It annoys me to be so dependent on the moods here in the Annex, but I'm not the only one: we're all subject to them. If I'm engrossed in a book, I have to rearrange my thoughts before I can mingle with other people, because otherwise they might think I was strange. As you can see, I'm currently in the middle of a depression. I couldn't really tell you what set it off, but I think it stems from my cowardice, which confronts me at every turn. This evening, when Bep was still here, the doorbell rang long and loud. I instantly turned white, my stomach churned, and my heart beat wildly -- and all because I was afraid.

At night in bed I see myself alone in a dungeon, without Father and Mother. Or I'm roaming the streets, or the Annex is on fire, or they come in the middle of the night to take us away and I crawl under my bed in desperation. I see everything as if it were actually taking place. And to think it might all happen soon!

Miep often says she envies us because we have such peace and quiet here. That may be true, but she's obviously not thinking about our fear. 

I simply can't imagine the world will ever be normal again for us. I do talk about "after the war," but it's as if I were talking about a castle in the air, something that can Ii never come true. 

I see the ei ght of us in the Annex as if we were a patch of blue sky surrounded by menacing black clouds. The perfectly round spot on which we're standing is still safe, but the clouds are moving in on us, and the ring between us and the approaching danger is being pulled tighter and tighter. We're surrounded by darkness and danger, and in our desperate search for a way out we keep bumping into each other. We look at the fighting down below and the peace and beauty up above. In the meantime, we've been cut off by the dark mass of clouds, so that we can go neither up nor down. It looms before us like an impenetrable wall, trying to crush us, but not yet able to. I can only cry out and implore, "Oh, ring, ring, open wide and let us out!"

Yours, Anne

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 11, 1943

Dearest Kitty,

I have a good title for this chapter:

Ode to My Fountain Pen
In Memoriam

My fountain pen was always one of my most prized possessions; I valued it highly, especially because it had a thick nib, and I can only write neatly with thick nibs. It has led a long and interesting fountain-pen life, which I will summarize below.

When I was nine, my fountain pen (packed in cotton) arrived as a "sample of no commercial value" all the way from Aachen, where my grandmother (the kindly donor) used to live. I lay in bed with the flu, while the February winds howled around the apartment house. This splendid fountain pen came in a red leather case, and I showed it to my girlfriends the first chance I got. Me, Anne Frank, the proud owner of a fountain pen.

When I was ten, I was allowed to take the pen to school, and to my surprise, the teacher even let me write with it. When I was eleven, however, my treasure had to be tucked away again, because my sixth-grade teacher allowed us to use only school pens and inkpots. When I was twelve, I started at the Jewish Lyceum and my fountain pen was given a new case in honor of the occasion. Not only did it have room for a pencil, it also had a zipper, which was much more impressive. When I was thirteen, the fountain pen went with me to the Annex, and together we've raced through countless diaries and compositions. I'd turned fourteen and my fountain pen was enjoying the last year of its life with me when . . .

It was just after five on Friday afternoon. I came out of my room and was about to sit down at the table to write when I was roughly pushed to one side to make room for Margot and Father, who wanted to practice their Latin. The fountain pen remained unused on the table, while its owner, sighing, was forced to make do with a very tiny corner of the table, where she began rubbing beans. That's how we remove mold from the beans and restore them to their original state. At a quarter to six I swept the floor, dumped the dirt into a news paper, along with the rotten beans, and tossed it into the stove. A giant flame shot up, and I thought it was wonderful that the stove, which had been gasping its last breath, had made such a miraculous recovery.

All was quiet again. The Latin students had left, and I sat down at the table to pick up where I'd left off. But no matter where I looked, my fountain pen was nowhere in sight. I took another look. Margot looked, Mother looked, Father looked, Dussel looked. But it had vanished.

"Maybe it fell in the stove, along with the beans!" Margot suggested.

"No, it couldn't have!" I replied.

But that evening, when my fountain pen still hadn't turned up, we all assumed it had been burned, especially because celluloid is highly inflammable. Our darkest fears were confirmed the next day when Father went to empty the stove and discovered the clip, used to fasten it to a pocket, among the ashes. Not a trace of the gold nib was left. "It must have melted into stone," Father conjectured.

I'm left with one consolation, small though it may be: my fountain pen was cremated, just as I would like to be someday!

Yours, Anne

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 1943

Dearest Kitty,

Recent events have the house rocking on its foundations. Owing to an outbreak of diphtheria at Bep's, she won't be allowed to come in contact with us for six weeks. Without her, the cooking and shopping will be very difficult, not to mention how much we'll miss her company. Mr. Kleiman is still in bed and has eaten nothing but gruel for three weeks. Mr. Kugler is up to his neck in work.

Margot sends her Latin lessons to a teacher, who corrects and then returns them. She's registered under Bep's name. The teacher's very nice, and witty too. I bet he's glad to have such a smart student.

Dussel is in a turmoil and we don't know why. It all began with Dussel's saying nothing when he was upstairs; he didn't exchange so much as a word with either Mr. or Mrs. van Daan. We all noticed it. This went on for a few days, and then Mother took the opportunity to warn him about Mrs. van D., who could make life miserable for him. Dussel said Mr. van Daan had started the silent treatment and he had no intention of breaking it. I should explain that yesterday was November 16, the first anniversary of his living in the Annex. Mother received a plant in honor of the occasion, but Mrs. van Daan, who had alluded to the date for weeks and made no bones about the fact that she thought Dussel should treat us to dinner, received nothing. Instead of making use of the opportunity to thank us -- for the first time -- for unselfishly taking him in, he didn't utter a word. And on the morning of the sixteenth, when I asked him whether I should offer him my congratulations or my condolences, he replied that either one would do. Mother, having cast herself in the role of peacemaker, made no headway whatsoever, and the situation finally ended in a draw.

I can say without exaggeration that Dussel has definitely got a screw loose. We often laugh to ourselves because he has no memory, no fixed opinions and no common sense. He's amused us more than once by trying to pass on the news he's just heard, since the message invariably gets garbled in transmission. Furthermore, he answers every reproach or accusation with a load of fine 1\ promises, which he never manages to keep. 

"Der Mann hat einen grossen Geist 
Una ist so klein van Taten!"* 
[*A well-known expression: 
"The spirit of the man is great, 
How puny are his deeds." 

Yours, Anne 

SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 27, 1943 

Dearest Kitty, 

Last night, just as I was falling asleep, Hanneli suddenly appeared before me. 

I saw her there, dressed in rags, her face thin and worn. She looked at me with such sadness and reproach in her enormous eyes that I could read the message in them: "Oh, Anne, why have you deserted me? Help me, help me, rescue me from this hell!"

And I can't help her. I can only stand by and watch while other people suffer and die. All I can do is pray to God to bring her back to us. I saw Hanneli, and no one else, and I understood why. I misjudged her, wasn't mature enough to understand how difficult it was for her. She was devoted to her girlfriend, and it must have seemed as though I were trying to take her away. The poor thing, she must have felt awful! I know, because I recognize the feeling in myself! I had an occasional flash of understanding, but then got selfishly wrapped up again in my own problems and pleasures.

It was mean of me to treat her that way, and now she was looking at me, oh so helplessly, with her pale face and beseeching eyes. If only I could help her! Dear God, I have everything I could wish for, while fate has her in its deadly clutches. She was as devout as I am, maybe even more so, and she too wanted to do what was right. But then why have I been chosen to live, while she's probably going to die? What's the difference between us? Why are we now so far apart?

To be honest, I hadn't thought of her for months -- no, for at least a year. I hadn't forgotten her entirely, and yet it wasn't until I saw her before me that I thought of all her suffering.

Oh, Hanneli, I hope that if you live to the end of the war and return to us, I'll be able to take you in and make up for the wrong I've done you.

But even if I were ever in a position to help, she wouldn't need it more than she does now. I wonder if she ever thinks of me, and what she's feeling?

Merciful God, comfort her, so that at least she won't be alone. Oh, if only You could tell her I'm thinking of her with compassion and love, it might help her go on.

I've got to stop dwelling on this. It won't get me anywhere. I keep seeing her enormous eyes, and they haunt me. Does Hanneli really and truly believe in God, or has religion merely been foisted upon her? I don't even know that. I never took the trouble to ask.

Hanneli, Hanneli, if only I could take you away, if only I could share everything I have with you. It's too late. I can't help, or undo the wrong I've done. But I'll never forget her again and I'll always pray for her!

Yours, Anne 

MONDAY, DECEMBER 6, 1943

Dearest Kitty,

The closer it got to St. Nicholas Day, the more we all thought back to last year's festively decorated basket.

More than anyone, I thought it would be terrible to skip a celebration this year. After long deliberation, I finally came up with an idea, something funny. I consulted rim, and a week ago we set to work writing a verse for each person.

Sunday evening at a quarter to eight we trooped upstairs carrying the big laundry basket, which had been decorated with cutouts and bows made of pink and blue carbon paper. On top was a large piece of brown wrapping paper with a note attached. Everyone was rather amazed at the sheer size of the gift. I removed the note and read it aloud:

"Once again St. Nicholas Day
Has even come to our hideaway;
It won't be quite as Jun, I fear,
As the happy day we had last year.
Then we were hopeful, no reason to doubt
That optimism would win the bout,
And by the time this year came round,
We'd all be free, and s* and sound.
Still, let's not Jorget it's St. Nicholas Day,
Though we've nothing left to give away.
We'll have to find something else to do:
So everyone please look in their shoe!"

As each person took their own shoe out of the basket, there was a roar of laughter. Inside each shoe was a little wrapped package addressed to its owner.

Yours, Anne

Dearest Kitty,

A bad case of flu has prevented me from writing to you until today. Being sick here is dreadful. With every cough, I had to duck under the blanket -- once, twice, three times -- and try to keep from coughing anymore.

Most of the time the tickle refused to go away, so I had to drink milk with honey, sugar or cough drops. I get dizzy just thinking about all the cures I've been subjected to: sweating out the fever, steam treatment, wet compresses, dry compresses, hot drinks, swabbing my throat, lying still, heating pad, hot-water bottles, lemonade and, every two hours, the thermometer. Will these remedies really make you better? The worst part was when Mr. Dussel decided to play doctor and lay his pomaded head on my bare chest to listen to the sounds. Not only did his hair tickle, but I was embarrassed, even though he went to school thirty years ago and does have some kind of medical degree. Why should he lay his head on my heart? After all, he's not my boyfriend! For that matter, he wouldn't be able to tell a healthy sound from an unhealthy one.

He'd have to have his ears cleaned first, since he's becoming alarmingly hard of hearing. But enough about my illness. I'm fit as a fiddle again. I've grown almost half an inch and gained two pounds. I'm pale, but itching to get back to my books.

Ausnahmsweise* (the only word that will do here [* By way of exception]), we're all getting on well together. No squabbles, though that probably won't last long. There hasn't been such peace and quiet in this house for at least six months.

Bep is still in isolation, but any day now her sister will no longer be contagious.

For Christmas, we're getting extra cooking oil, candy and molasses. For Hanukkah, Mr. Dussel gave Mrs. van Daan and Mother a beautiful cake, which he'd asked Miep to bake. On top of all the work she has to do! Margot and I received a brooch made out of a penny, all bright and shiny. I can't really describe it, but it's lovely.

I also have a Christmas present for Miep and Bep. For a whole month I've saved up the sugar I put on my hot cereal, and Mr. Kleiman has used it to have fondant made.

The weather is drizzly and overcast, the stove stinks, and the food lies heavily on our stomachs, producing a variety of rumbles.

The war is at an impasse, spirits are low. 

Yours, Anne

FRIDAY, DECEMBER 24, 1943

Dear Kitty,

As I've written you many times before, moods have a tendency to affect us quite a bit here, and in my case it's been getting worse lately. "Himmelhoch jauchzend, zu Tode betru'bt"* [* A famous line from Goethe: "On top of the world, or in the depths of despair."] certainly applies to me. I'm "on top of the world" when I think of how fortunate we are and compare myself to other Jewish children, and "in the depths of despair" when, for example, Mrs. Kleiman comes by and talks about Jopie's hockey club, canoe trips, school plays and afternoon teas with friends.

I don't think I'm jealous of Jopie, but I long to have a really good time for once and to laugh so hard it hurts.

We're stuck in this house like lepers, especially during winter and the Christmas and New Year's holidays. Actually, I shouldn't even be writing this, since it makes me seem so ungrateful, but I can't keep everything to myself, so I'll repeat what I said at the beginning: "Paper is more patient than people."

Whenever someone comes in from outside, with the wind in their clothes and the cold on their cheeks, I feel like burying my head under the blankets to keep from thinking, "When will we be allowed to breathe fresh air again?" I can't do that -- on the contrary, I have to hold my head up high and put a bold face on things, but the thoughts keep coming anyway. Not just once, but over and over.

Believe me, if you've been shut up for a year and a half, it can get to be too much for you sometimes. But feelings can't be ignored, no matter how unjust or ungrateful they seem. I long to ride a bike, dance, whistle, look at the world, feel young and know that I'm free, and yet I can't let it show. just imagine what would happen if all eight of us were to feel sorry for ourselves or walk around with the discontent clearly visible on our faces. Where would that get us? I sometimes wonder if anyone will ever understand what I mean, if anyone will ever overlook my ingratitude and not worry about whether or not I'm Jewish and merely see me as a teenager badly in need of some good plain fun. I don't know, and I wouldn't be able to talk about it with anyone, since I'm sure I'd start to cry. Crying can bring relief, as long as you don't cry alone. Despite all my theories and efforts, I miss -- every day and every hour of the day -- having a mother who understands me. That's why with everything I do and write, I imagine the kind of mom I'd like to be to my children later on. The kind of mom who doesn't take everything people say too seriously, but who does take me seriously. I find it difficult to describe what I mean, but the word' 'mom" says it all. Do you know what I've come up with? In order to give me the feeling of calling my mother something that sounds like "Mom," I often call her" Momsy." Sometimes I shorten it to "Moms"; an imperfect "Mom." I wish I could honor her by removing the "s." It's a good thing she doesn't realize this, since it would only make her unhappy.

Well, that's enough of that. My writing has raised me somewhat from "the depths of despair."

Yours, Anne

It's the day after Christmas, and I can't help thinking about Pim and the story he told me this time last year. I didn't understand the meaning of his words then as well as I do now. If only he'd bring it up again, I might be able to show him I understood what he meant!

I think Pim told me because he, who knows the "intimate secrets" of so many others, needed to express his own feelings for once; Pim never talks about himself, and I don't think Margot has any inkling of what he's been through. Poor Pim, he can't fool me into thinking he's forgotten that girl. He never will. It's made him very accommodating, since he's not blind to Mother's faults. I hope I'm going to be a little like him, without having to go through what he has!

Anne

MONDAY, DECEMBER 27, 1943

Friday evening, for the first time in my life, I received a Christmas present. Mr. Kleiman, Mr. Kugler and the girls had prepared a wonderful surprise for us. Miep made a delicious Christmas cake with "Peace 1944" written on top, and Bep provided a batch of cookies that was up to prewar standards.

There was a jar of yogurt for Peter, Margot and me, and a bottle of beer for each of the adults. And once again everything was wrapped so nicely, with pretty pictures glued to the packages. For the rest, the holidays passed by quickly for us.

Anne

WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 29, 1943

I was very sad again last night. Grandma and Hanneli came to me once more. Grandma, oh, my sweet Grandma. How little we understood what she suffered, how kind she always was and what an interest she took in everything that concerned us. And to think that all that time she was carefully guarding her terrible secret. * [*Anne's grandmother was terminally ill.]

Grandma was always so loyal and good. She would never have let any of us down. Whatever happened, no matter how much I misbehaved, Grandma always stuck up for me. Grandma, did you love me, or did you not understand me either? I don't know. How lonely Grandma must have been, in spite of us. You can be lonely even when you're loved by many people, since you're still not bd'"dI" any 0 y s one an only.

And Hanneli? Is she still alive? What's she doing? Dear God, watch over her and bring her back to us. Hanneli, you're a reminder of what my fate might have been. I keep seeing myself in your place. So why am I often miserable about what goes on here? Shouldn't I be happy, contented and glad, except when I'm thinking of Hanneli and those suffering along with her? I'm selfish and cowardly. Why do I always think and dream the most awful things and want to scream in terror? Because, in spite of everything, I still don't have enough faith in God. He's given me so much, which I don't deserve, and yet each day I make so many mistakes! 

Thinking about the suffering of those you hold dear can reduce you to tears; in fact, you could spend the whole day crying. The most you can do is pray for God to perform a miracle and save at least some of them. And I hope I'm doing enough of that!

Anne

THURSDAY, DECEMBER 30, 1943

Dearest Kitty,

Since the last raging quarrels, things have settled down here, not only between ourselves, Dussel and "upstairs," but also between Mr. and Mrs. van D. Nevertheless, a few dark thunderclouds are heading this way, and all because of . . . food. Mrs. van D. came up with the ridiculous idea of frying fewer potatoes in the morning and saving them for later in the day. Mother and Dussel and the rest of us didn't agree with her, so now we're dividing up the potatoes as well. It seems the fats and oils aren't being doled out fairly, and Mother's going to have to put a stop to it. I'll let you know if there are any interesting developments. For the last few months now we've been splitting up the meat (theirs with fat, ours without), the soup (they eat it, we don't), the potatoes (theirs peeled, ours not), the extras and now the fried potatoes too. 

If only we could split up completely!

Yours, Anne

P.S. Bep had a picture postcard of the entire Royal Family copied for me. Juliana looks very young, and so does the Queen. The three little girls are adorable. It was incredibly nice of Bep, don't you think?

SUNDAY, JANUARY 2, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

This morning, when I had nothing to do, I leafed through the pages of my diary and came across so many letters dealing with the subject of "Mother" in such strong terms that I was shocked. I said to myself, "Anne, is that really you talking about hate? Oh, Anne, how could you?"

I continued to sit with the open book in my hand and wonder why I was filled with so much anger and hate that I had to confide it all to you. I tried to understand the Anne of last year and make apologies for her, because as long as I leave you with these accusations and don't attempt to explain what prompted them, my conscience won't be clear. I was suffering then (and still do) from moods that kept my head under water (figuratively speaking) and allowed me to see things only from my own perspective, without calmly considering what the others -- those whom I, with my mercurial temperament, had hurt or offended -- had said, and then acting as they would have done.

I hid inside myself, thought of no one but myself and calmly wrote down all my joy, sarcasm and sorrow in my diary. Because this diary has become a kind of memory book, it means a great deal to me, but I could easily write "over and done with" on many of its pages.

I was furious at Mother (and still am a lot of the time). It's true, she didn't understand me, but I didn't understand her either. Because she loved me, she was tender and affectionate, but because of the difficult situations I put her in, and the sad circumstances in which she found herself, she was nervous and irritable, so I can understand why she was often short with me.

I was offended, took it far too much to heart and was insolent and beastly to her, which, in turn, made her unhappy. We were caught in a vicious circle of unpleasantness and sorrow. Not a very happy period for either of us, but at least it's coming to an end. I didn't want to see what was going on, and I felt very sorry for myself, but that's understandable too.

Those violent outbursts on paper are simply expressions of anger that, in normal life, I could have worked off by locking myself in my room and stamping my foot a few times or calling Mother names behind her back.

The period of tearfully passing judgment on Mother is over. I've grown wiser and Mother's nerves are a bit steadier. Most of the time I manage to hold my tongue when I'm annoyed, and she does too; so on the surface, we seem to be getting along better. But there's one thing I can't do, and that's to love Mother with the devotion of a child.

I soothe my conscience with the thought that it's better for unkind words to be down on paper than for Mother to have to carry them around in her heart.

Yours, Anne

THURSDAY, JANUARY 6, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Today I have two things to confess. It's going to take a long time, but I have to tell them to someone, and you're the most likely candidate, since I know you'll keep a secret, no matter what happens.

The first is about Mother. As you know, I've frequently complained about her and then tried my best to be nice. I've suddenly realized what's wrong with her. Mother has said that she sees us more as friends than as daughters. That's all very nice, of course, except that a friend can't take the place of a mother. I need my mother to set a good example and be a person I can respect, but in most matters she's an example of what not to do. I have the feeling that Margot thinks so differently about these things that she'd never be able to understand what I've just told you. And Father avoids all conversations having to do with Mother.

I imagine a mother as a woman who, first and foremost, possesses a great deal of tact, especially toward her adolescent children, and not one who, like Momsy, pokes fun at me when I cry. Not because I'm in pain, but because of other things.

This may seem trivial, but there's one incident I've never forgiven her for. It happened one day when I had to go to the dentist. Mother and Margot planned to go with me and agreed I should take my bicycle. When the dentist was finished and we were back outside, Margot and Mother very sweetly informed me that they were going downtown to buy or look at something, I don't remember what, and of course I wanted to go along. But they said I couldn't come because I had my bike with me. Tears of rage rushed to my eyes, and Margot and Mother began laughing at me. I was so furious that I stuck my tongue out at them, right there on the street. A little old lady happened to be passing by, and she looked terribly shocked. I rode my bike home and must have cried for hours. Strangely enough, even though Mother has wounded me thousands of times, this particular wound still stings whenever I think of how angry I was.

I find it difficult to confess the second one because it's about myself. I'm not prudish, Kitty, and yet every time they give a blow-by-blow account of their trips to the bathroom, which they often do, my whole body rises in revolt. 

Yesterday I read an article on blushing by Sis Heyster. It was as if she'd addressed it directly to me. Not that I blush easily, but the rest of the article did apply. What she basically says is that during puberty girls withdraw into themselves and begin thinking about the wondrous changes taking place in their bodies. I feel that too, which probably accounts for my recent embarrassment over Margot, Mother and Father. On the other hand, Margot is a lot shyer than I am, and yet she's not in the least embarrassed.

I think that what's happening to me is so wonderful, and I don't just mean the changes taking place on the outside of my body, but also those on the inside. I never discuss myself or any of these things with others, which is why I have to talk about them to myself. Whenever I get my period (and that's only been three times), I have the feeling that in spite of all the pain, discomfort and mess, I'm carrying around a sweet secret. So even though it's a nuisance, in a certain way I'm always looking forward to the time when I'll feel that secret inside me once again.

Sis Heyster also writes that girls my age feel very insecure about themselves and are just beginning to discover that they're individuals with their own ideas, thoughts and habits. I'd just turned thirteen when I came here, so I started thinking about myself and realized that I've become an "independent person" sooner than most girls. Sometimes when I lie in bed at night I feel a terrible urge to touch my breasts and listen to the quiet, steady beating of my heart.

Unconsciously, I had these feelings even before I came here. Once when I was spending the night at Jacque's, I could no longer restrain my curiosity about her body, which she'd always hidden from me and which I'd never seen. I asked her whether, as proof of our friendiship, we could touch each other's breasts. Jacque refused.

I also had a terrible desire to kiss her, which I did. Every time I see a female nude, such as the Venus in my art history book, I go into ecstasy. Sometimes I find them so exquisite I have to struggle to hold back my tears. If only I had a girlfriend!

THURSDAY, JANUARY 6, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

My longing for someone to talk to has become so unbearable that I somehow took it into my head to select Peter for this role. On the few occasions when I have gone to Peter's room during the day, I've always thought it was nice and cozy. But Peter's too polite to show someone the door when they're bothering him, so I've never dared to stay long. I've always been afraid he'd think I was a pest. I've been looking for an excuse to linger in his room and get him talking without his noticing, and yesterday I got my chance. Peter, you see, is currently going through a crossword-puzzle craze, and he doesn't do anything else all day. I was helping him, and we soon wound up sitting across from each other at his table, Peter on the chair and me on the divan.

It gave me a wonderful feeling when I looked into his dark blue eyes and saw how bashful my unexpected visit had made him. I could read his innermost thoughts, and in his face I saw a look of helplessness and uncertainty as to how to behave, and at the same time a flicker of awareness of his masculinity. I saw his shyness, and I melted. I wanted to say, "Tell me about yourself. Look beneath my chatty exterior." But I found that it was easier to think up questions than to ask them.

The evening came to a close, and nothing happened, except that I told him about the article on blushing. Not what I wrote you, of course, just that he would grow more secure as he got older. "

That night I lay in bed and cried my eyes out, all the i while making sure no one could hear me. The idea that I had to beg Peter for favors was simply revolting. But people will do almost anything to satisfy their longings; take me, for example, I've made up my mind to visit Peter more often and, somehow, get him to talk to me.

You mustn't think I'm in love with Peter, because I'm not. If the van Daans had had a daughter instead of a son, I'd have tried to make friends with her.

This morning I woke up just before seven and immediately remembered what I'd been dreaming about. I was sitting on a chair and across from me was Peter. . . Peter Schiff. We were looking at a book of drawings by Mary Bos. The dream was so vivid I can even remember some of the drawings. But that wasn't all -- the dream went on. Peter's eyes suddenly met mine, and I stared for a long time into those velvety brown eyes. Then he said very softly, "If I'd only known, I'd have come to you long ago!" I turned abruptly away, overcome by emotion. And then I felt a soft, oh-so-cool and gentle cheek against mine, and it felt so good, so good . . .

At that point I woke up, still feeling his cheek against mine and his brown eyes staring deep into my heart, so deep that he could read how much I'd loved him and how much I still do. Again my eyes filled with tears, and I was sad because I'd lost him once more, and yet at the same time glad because I knew with certainty that Peter is still the only one for me. '

It's funny, but I often have such vivid images in my dreams. One night I saw Grammy* [*Grammy is Anne's grandmother on her father's side, and Grandma her grandmother on her mother's side.] so clearly that I could even make out her skin of soft, crinkly velvet. Another time Grandma appeared to me as a guardian angel. After that it was Hanneli, who still symbolizes to me the suffering of my friends as well as that of Jews in general, so that when I'm praying for her, I'm also praying for all the Jews and all those in need.

And now Peter, my dearest Peter. I've never had such a clear mental image of him. I don't need a photograph, I can see him oh so well.

Yours, Anne

FRIDAY, ]ANUARY 7, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

I'm such an idiot. I forgot that I haven't yet told you the story of my one true love.

When I was a little girl, way back in kindergarten, I took a liking to Sally Kimmel. His father was gone, and he and his mother lived with an aunt. One of Sally's cousins was a good-looking, slender, dark-haired boy named Appy, who later turned out to look like a movie idol and aroused more admiration than the short, comical, chubby Sally. For a long time we went everywhere together, but aside from that, my love was unrequited until Peter crossed my path. I had an out-and-out crush on him. He liked me too, and we were inseparable for one whole summer. I can still see us walking hand in hand through our neighborhood, Peter in a white cotton suit and me in a short summer dress. At the end of the summer vacation he went to the seventh grade at the middle school, while I was in the sixth grade at the grammar school. He'd pick me up on the way home, or I'd pick him up. Peter was the ideal boy: tall, good-looking and slender, with a serious, quiet and intelligent face. He had dark hair, beautiful brown eyes, ruddy cheeks and a nicely pointed nose. I was crazy about his smile, which made him look so boyish and mischievous.

I'd gone away to the countryside during summer vacation, and when I came back, Peter was no longer at his old address; he'd moved and was living with a much older boy, who apparently told him I was just a kid, because Peter stopped seeing me. I loved him so much that I didn't want to face the truth. I kept clinging to him until the day I finally realized that if I continued to chase after him, people would say I was boy-crazy.

The years went by. Peter hung around with girls his own age and no longer bothered to say hello to me. I started school at the Jewish Lyceum, and several boys in my class were in love with me. I enjoyed it and felt honored by their attentions, but that was all. Later on, Hello had a terrible crush on me, but as I've already told you, I never fell in love again.

There's a saying: "Time heals all wounds." That's how it was with me. I told myself I'd forgotten Peter and no longer liked him in the least. But my memories of him were so strong that I had to admit to myself that the only reason I no longer liked him was that I was jealous of the other girls. This morning I realized that nothing has changed; on the contrary, as I've grown older and more mature, my love has grown along with me. I can understand now that Peter thought I was childish, and yet it still hurts to think he'd forgotten me completely. I saw his face so clearly; I knew for certain that no one but Peter could have stuck in my mind that way.

I've been in an utter state of confusion today. When Father kissed me this morning, I wanted to shout, "Oh, if only you were Peter!" I've been thinking of him constantly, and all day long I've been repeating to myself, "Oh, Petel, my darling, darling Petel . . ."

Where can I find help? I simply have to go on living and praying to God that, if we ever get out of here, Peter's path will cross mine and he'll gaze into my eyes, read the love in them and say, "Oh, Anne, if I'd only known, I'd have come to you long ago."

Once when Father and I were talking about sex, he said I was too young to understand that kind of desire. But I thought I did understand it, and now I'm sure I do. Nothing is as dear to me now as my darling Petel!

I saw my face in the mirror, and it looked so different. My eyes were clear and deep, my cheeks were rosy, which they hadn't been in weeks, my mouth was much softer. I looked happy, and yet there was something so sad in my expression that the smile immediately faded from my lips. I'm not happy, since I know Petel's not thinking of me, and yet I can still feel his beautiful eyes gazing at me and his cool, soft cheek against mine. . . Oh, Petel, Petel, how am I ever going to free myself from your image? Wouldn't anyone who took your place be a poor substitute? I love you, with a love so great that it simply couldn't keep growing inside my heart, but had to leap out and reveal itself in all its magnitude.

A week ago, even a day ago, if you'd asked me, "Which of your friends do you think you'd be most likely to marry?" I'd have answered, "Sally, since he makes me feel good, peaceful and safe!" But now I'd cry, "Petel, because I love him with all my heart and all my soul. I surrender myself completely!" Except for that one thing: he may touch my face, but that's as far as it goes.

This morning I imagined I was in the front attic with Petel, sitting on the floor by the windows, and after talking for a while, we both began to cry. Moments later I felt his mouth and his wonderful cheek! Oh, Petel, come to me. Think of me, my dearest Petel!

WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 12, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Bep's been back for the last two weeks, though her sister won't be allowed back at school until next week. Bep herself spent two days in bed with a bad cold. Miep and Jan were also out for two days, with upset stomachs.

I'm currently going through a dance and ballet craze and am diligently practicing my dance steps every evening. I've made an ultramodern dance costume out of a lacy lavender slip belonging to Momsy. Bias tape is threaded through the top and tied just above the bust. A pink corded ribbon completes the ensemble. I tried to turn my tennis shoes into ballet slippers, but with no success. My stiff limbs are well on the way to becoming as limber as they used to be. A terrific exercise is to sit on the floor, place a heel in each hand and raise both legs in the air. I have to sit on a cushion, because otherwise my poor backside really takes a beating.

Everyone here is reading a book called A Cloudless Morning. Mother thought it was extremely good because it describes a number of adolescent problems. I thought to myself, a bit ironically, "Why don't you take more interest in your own adolescents first!"

I think Mother believes that Margot and I have a better relationship with our parents than anyone in the whole wide world, and that no mother is more involved in the lives of her children than she is. She must have my sister in mind, since I don't believe Margot has the same problems and thoughts as I do. Far be it from me to point out to Mother that one of her daughters is not at all what she imagines. She'd be completely bewildered, and anyway, she'd never be able to change; I'd like to spare her that grief, especially since I know that everything would remain the same. Mother does sense that Margot loves her much more than I do, but she thinks I'm just going through a phase.

Margot's gotten much nicer. She seems a lot different than she used to be. She's not nearly as catty these days and is becoming a real friend. She no longer thinks of me as a litde kid who doesn't count.

It's funny, but I can sometimes see myself as others see me. I take a leisurely look at the person called "Anne Frank" and browse through the pages of her life as though she were a stranger.

Before I came here, when I didn't think about things as much as I do now, I occasionally had the feeling that I didn't belong to Momsy, Pim and Margot and that I would always be an outsider. I sometimes went around for six months at a time pretending I was an orphan. Then I'd chastise myself for playing the victim, when really, I'd always been so fortunate. After that I'd force myself to be friendly for a while. Every morning when I heard footsteps on the stairs, I hoped it would be Mother coming to say good morning. I'd greet her warmly, because I honesly did look forward to her affectionate glance. But then she'd snap at me for having made some comment or other (and I'd go off to school feeling completely discouraged.

On the way home I'd make excuses for her, telling myself that she had so many worries. I'd arrive home in high spirits, chatting nineteen to the dozen, until the events of the morning would repeat themselves and I'd leave the room with my schoolbag in my hand and a pensive look on my face. Sometimes I'd decide to stay angry, but then I always had so much to talk about after school that I'd forget my resolution and want Mother to stop whatever she was doing and lend a willing ear. Then the time would come once more when I no longer listened for the steps on the stairs and felt lonely and cried into my pillow every night.

Everything has gotten much worse here. But you already knew that. Now God has sent someone to help me: Peter. I fondle my pendant, press it to my lips and think, "What do I care! Petel is mine and nobody knows it!" With this in mind, I can rise above every nasty remark. Which of the people here would suspect that so much is going on in the mind of a teenage girl?

SATURDAY, JANUARY 15, 1944

My dearest Kitty,

There's no reason for me to go on describing all our quarrels and arguments down to the last detail. It's enough to tell you that we've divided many things like meat and fats and oils and are frying our own potatoes. Recently we've been eating a little extra rye bread because by four o'clock we're so hungry for dinner we can barely control our rumbling stomachs.

Mother's birthday is rapidly approaching. She received some extra sugar from Mr. Kugler, which sparked off jealousy on the part of the van Daans, because Mrs. van D. didn't receive any on her birthday. But what's the point of boring you with harsh words, spiteful conversations and tears when you know they bore us even more?

Mother has expressed a wish, which isn't likely to come true any time soon: not to have to see Mr. van Daan's face for two whole weeks. I wonder if everyone who shares a house sooner or later ends up at odds with their fellow residents. Or have we just had a stroke of bad luck? At mealtime, when Dussel helps himself to a quarter of the half-filled gravy boat and leaves the rest of us to do without, I lose my appetite and feel like jumping to my feet, knocking him off his chair and throwing him out the door.

Are most people so stingy and selfish? I've gained some insight into human nature since I came here, which is good, but I've had enough for the present. Peter says the same.

The war is going to go on despite our quarrels and our longing for freedom and fresh air, so we should try to make the best of our stay here.

I'm preaching, but I also believe that if I live here much longer, I'll turn into a dried-up old beanstalk. And all I really want is to be an honest-to-goodness teenager!

Yours, Anne

WEDNESDAY EVENING, JANUARY 19, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

I (there I go again!) don't know what's happened, but since my dream I keep noticing how I've changed. By the way, I dreamed about Peter again last night and once again I felt his eyes penetrate mine, but this dream was less vivid and not quite as beautiful as the last.

You know that I always used to be jealous of Margot's relationship with Father. There's not a trace of my jealousy left now; I still feel hurt when Father's nerves cause him to be unreasonable toward me, but then I think, "I can't blame you for being the way you are. You talk so much about the minds of children and adolescents, but you don't know the first thing about them!" I long for more than Father's affection, more than his hugs and kisses. Isn't it awful of me to be so preoccupied with myself? Shouldn't I, who want to be good and kind, forgive them first? I forgive Mother too, but every time she makes a sarcastic remark or laughs at me, it's all I can do to control myself.

I know I'm far from being what I should; will I ever be?

Anne Frank

P.S. Father asked if I told you about the cake. For Mother's birthday, she received a real mocha cake, prewar quality, from the office. It was a really nice day! But at the moment there's no room in my head for things like that.

SATURDAY, JANUARY 22, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Can you tell me why people go to such lengths to hide their real selves? Or why I always behave very differently when I'm in the company of others? Why do people have so little trust in one another? I know there must be a reason, but sometimes I think it's horrible that you can't ever confide in anyone, not even those closest to you.

It seems as if I've grown up since the night I had that dream, as if I've become more independent. You'll be amazed when I tell you that even my attitude toward the van Daans has changed. I've stopped looking at all the discussions and arguments from my family's biased point of view. What's brought on such a radical change? Well, you see, I suddenly realized that if Mother had been different, if she'd been a real mom, our relationship would have been very, very different. Mrs. van Daan is by no means a wonderful person, yet half the arguments could have been avoided if Mother hadn't been so hard to deal with every time they got onto a tricky subject. Mrs. van Daan does have one good point, though: you can talk to her. She may be selfish, stingy and underhanded, but she'll readily back down as long as you don't provoke her and make her unreasonable. This tactic doesn't work every time, but if you're patient, you can keep trying and see how far you get.

All the conflicts about our upbringing, about not pampering children, about the food -- about everything, absolutely everything -- might have taken a different turn if we'd remained open and on friendly terms instead of always seeing the worst side.

I know exactly what you're going to say, Kitty.

"But, Anne, are these words really coming from your lips? From you, who have had to put up with so many unkind words from upstairs? From you, who are aware of all the injustices?"

And yet they are coming from me. I want to take a fresh look at things and form my own opinion, not just ape my parents, as in the proverb "The apple never falls far from the tree." I want to reexamine the van Daans and decide for myself what's true and what's been blown out of proportion. If I wind up being disappointed in them, I can always side with Father and Mother. But if not, I can try to change their attitude. And if that doesn't work, I'll have to stick with my own opinions and judgment. I'll take every opportunity to speak openly to Mrs. van D. about our many differences and not be afraid --  despite my reputation as a smart aleck -- to offer my impartial opinion. I won't say anything negative about my own family, though that doesn't mean I won't defend them if somebody else does, and as of today, my gossiping is a thing of the past.

Up to now I was absolutely convinced that the van Daans were entirely to blame for the quarrels, but now I'm sure the fault was largely ours. We were right as far as the subject matter was concerned, but intelligent people (such as ourselves!) should have more insight into how to deal with others.

I hope I've got at least a touch of that insight, and that I'll find an occasion to put it to good use.

Yours, Anne

MONDAY, JANUARY 24, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

A very strange thing has happened to me. (Actually, "happened" isn't quite the right word.)

Before I came here, whenever anyone at home or at school talked about sex, they were either secretive or disgusting. Any words having to do with sex were spoken in a low whisper, and kids who weren't in the know were often laughed at. That struck me as odd, and I often wondered why people were so mysterious or obnoxious when they talked about this subject. But because I couldn't change things, I said as little as possible or asked my girlfriends for information.

After I'd learned quite a lot, Mother once said to me, "Anne, let me give you some good advice. Never discuss this with boys, and if they bring it up, don't answer them."

I still remember my exact reply. "No, of course not," I exclaimed. "Imagine!" And nothing more was said.

When we first went into hiding, Father often told me about things I'd rather have heard from Mother, and I learned the rest from books or things I picked up in conversations.

Peter van Daan wasn't ever as obnoxious about this subject as the boys at school. Or maybe just once or twice, in the beginning, though he wasn't trying to get me to talk. Mrs. van Daan once told us she'd never discussed these matters with Peter, and as far as she knew, neither had her husband. Apparently she didn't even know how much Peter knew or where he got his information.

Yesterday, when Margot, Peter and I were peeling potatoes, the conversation somehow turned to Boche. "We're still not sure whether Boche is a boy or a girl, are we?" I asked. 

Yes we are, he answered. "Boche is a tomcat."

I began to laugh. "Some tomcat if he's pregnant."

Peter and Margot joined in the laughter. You see, a month or two ago Peter informed us that Boche was sure to have kittens before long, because her stomach was rapidly swelling. However, Boche's fat tummy turned out to be due to a bunch of stolen bones. No kittens were growing inside, much less about to be born.

Peter felt called upon to defend himself against my accusation. "Come with me. You can see for yourself. I was horsing around with the cat one day, and I could definitely see it was a 'he.' "

Unable to restrain my curiosity, I went with him to the warehouse. Boche, however, wasn't receiving visitors at that hour, and was nowhere in sight. We waited for a while, but when it got cold, we went back upstairs.

Later that afternoon I heard Peter go downstairs for the second time. I mustered the courage to walk through the silent house by myself and reached the warehouse. Boche was on the packing table, playing with Peter, who was getting ready to put him on the scale and weigh him.

"Hi, do you want to have a look?" Without any preliminaries, he picked up the cat, turned him over on his back, deftly held his head and paws and began the lesson. "This is the male sexual organ, these are a few stray hairs, and that's his backside."

The cat flipped himself over and stood up on his little white feet.

If any other boy had pointed out the "male sexual organ" to me, I would never have given him a second glance. But Peter went on talking in a normal voice about what is otherwise a very awkward subject. Nor did he have any ulterior motives. By the time he'd finished, I felt so much at ease that I started acting normally too. We played with Boche, had a good time, chatted a bit and finally sauntered through the long warehouse to the door. "Were you there when Mouschi was fixed?"

"Yeah, sure. It doesn't take long. They give the cat an anesthetic, of course."

"Do they take something out?"

"No, the vet just snips the tube. There's nothing to see on the outside."

I had to get up my nerve to ask a question, since it wasn't as "normal" as I thought. "Peter, the German word Geschlechtsteil means 'sexual organ,' doesn't it? But then the male and female ones have different names."

"I know that."

"The female one is a vagina, that I know, but I don't know what it's called in males."

"Oh well," I said. "How are we supposed to know these words? Most of the time you just come across them by accident."

"Why wait? I'll ask my parents. They know more than I do and they've had more experience."

We were already on the stairs, so nothing more was said.

Yes, it really did happen. I'd never have talked to a girl about this in such a normal tone of voice. I'm also certain that this isn't what Mother meant when she warned me about boys.

All the same, I wasn't exactly my usual self for the rest of the day. When I thought back to our talk, it struck me as odd. But I've learned at least one thing: there are young people, even those of the opposite sex, who can discuss these things naturally, without cracking jokes.

Is Peter really going to ask his parents a lot of questions? Is he really the way he seemed yesterday?

Oh, what do I know?!!!

Yours, Anne

FRIDAY, JANUARY 28, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

In recent weeks I've developed a great liking for family trees and the genealogical tables of royal families. I've come to the conclusion that once you begin your search, you have to keep digging deeper and deeper into the past, which leads you to even more interesting discoveries.

Although I'm extremely diligent when it comes to my schoolwork and can pretty much follow the BBC Home Service on the radio, I still spend many of my Sundays sorting out and looking over my movie-star collection, which has grown to a very respectable size. Mr. Kugler makes me happy every Monday by bringing me a copy of Cinema & Theater magazine. The less worldly members of our household often refer to this small indulgence as a waste of money, yet they never fail to be surprised at how accurately I can list the actors in any given movie, even after a year. Bep, who often goes to the movies with her boyfriend on her day off, tells me on 

Saturday the name of the show they're going to see, and I then proceed to rattle off the names of the leading actors and actresses and the reviews. Moms recently remarked ; that I wouldn't need to go to the movies later on, because !

I know all the plots, the names of the stars and the reviews by heart. 

Whenever I come sailing in with a new hairstyle, I I can read the disapproval on their faces, and I can be sure someone will ask which movie star I'm trying to imitate. My reply, that it's my own invention, is greeted with ~ skepticism. As for the hairdo, it doesn't hold its set for ~ more than half an hour. By that time I'm so sick and tired i of their remarks that I race to the bathroom and restore my hair to its normal mass of curls.

Yours, Anne

FRIDAY, JANUARY 28, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

This morning I was wondering whether you ever felt like a cow, having to chew my stale news over and over again until you're so fed up with the monotonous fare that you yawn and secretly wish Anne would dig up something new.

Sorry, I know you find it dull as ditchwater, but imagine how sick and tired I am of hearing the same old stuff. If the talk at mealtime isn't about politics or good food, then Mother or Mrs. van D. trot out stories about their childhood that we've heard a thousand times before, or Dussel goes on and on about beautiful racehorses, his Charlotte's extensive wardrobe, leaky rowboats, boys who can swim at the age of four, aching muscles and frightened patients. It all boils down to this: whenever one of the eight of us opens his mouth, the other seven can finish the story for him. We know the punch line of every joke before it gets told, so that whoever's telling it is left to laugh alone. The various milkmen, grocers and butchers of the two former housewives have been praised to the skies or run into the ground so many times that in our imaginations they've grown as old as Methuselah; there's absolutely no chance of anything new or fresh being brought up for discussion in the Annex.

Still, all this might be bearable if only the grown-ups weren't in the habit of repeating the stories we hear from Mr. Kleiman, jan or Miep, each time embellishing them with a few details of their own, so that I often have to pinch my arm under the table to keep myself from setting the enthusiastic storyteller on the right track. Little children, such as Anne, must never, ever correct their elders, no matter how many blunders they make or how often they let their imaginations run away with them. 

Jan and Mr. Kleiman love talking about people who have gone underground or into hiding; they know we're eager to hear about others in our situation and that we truly sympathize with the sorrow of those who've been arrested as well as the joy of prisoners who've been freed.

Going underground or into hiding has become as routine as the proverbial pipe and slippers that used to await the man of the house after a long day at work. There are many resistance groups, such as Free Netherlands, that forge identity cards, provide financial support to those in hiding, organize hiding places and find work for young Christians who go underground. It's amazing how much these generous and unselfish people do, risking their own lives to help and save others.

The best example of this is our own helpers, who have managed to pull us through so far and will hopefully bring us safely to shore, because otherwise they'll find themselves sharing the fate of those they're trying to protect. Never have they uttered a single word about the burden we must be, never have they complained that we're too much trouble. They come upstairs every day and talk to the men about business and politics, to the women about food and wartime difficulties and to the children about books and newspapers. They put on their most cheerful expressions, bring flowers and gifts for birthdays and holidays and are always ready to do what they can. That's something we should never forget; while others display their heroism in battle or against the Germans, our helpers prove theirs every day by their good spirits and affection.

The most bizarre stories are making the rounds, yet most of them are really true. For instance, Mr. Kleiman reported this week that a soccer match was held in the province of Gelderland; one team consisted entirely of men who had gone underground, and the other of eleven Military Policemen. In Hilversum, new registration cards were issued. In order for the many people in hiding to get their rations (you have to show this card to obtain your ration book or else pay 60 guilders a book), the registrar asked all those hiding in that district to pick up their cards at a specified hour, when the documents could be collected at a separate table.

All the same, you have to be careful that stunts like these don't reach the ears of the Germans.

Yours, Anne

SUNDAY, JANUARY 30, 1944

My dearest Kit,

Another Sunday has rolled around; I don't mind them as much as I did in the beginning, but they're boring enough.

I still haven't gone to the warehouse yet, but maybe sometime soon. Last night I went downstairs in the dark, all by myself, after having been there with Father a few nights before. I stood at the top of the stairs while German planes flew back and forth, and I knew I was on my own, that I couldn't count on others for support. My fear vanished. I looked up at the sky and trusted in God.

I have an intense need to be alone. Father has noticed I'm not my usual self, but I can't tell him what's bothering me. All I want to do is scream "Let me be, leave me alone!"

Who knows, perhaps the day will come when I'm left alone more than I'd like!

Anne Frank

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 3, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Invasion fever is mounting daily throughout the country. If you were here, I'm sure you'd be as impressed as I am at the many preparations, though you'd no doubt laugh at all the fuss we're making. Who knows, it may all be for nothing!

The papers are full of invasion news and are driving everyone insane with such statements as: "In the event of a British landing in Holland, the Germans will do what they can to defend the country, even flooding it, if necessary." They've published maps of Holland with the potential flood areas marked. Since large portions of Amsterdam were shaded in, our first question was what we should do if the water in the streets rose to above our waists. This tricky question elicited a variety of responses:

"It'll be impossible to walk or ride a bike, so we'll have to wade through the water."

"Don't be silly. We'll have to try and swim. We'll all put on our bathing suits and caps and swim underwater as much as we can, so nobody can see we're Jews."

"Oh, baloney! I can just imagine the ladies swimming with the rats biting their legs!" (That was a man, of course; we'll see who screams loudest!)

"We won't even be able to leave the house. The warehouse is so unstable it'll collapse if there's a flood."

"Listen, everyone, all joking aside, we really ought to try and get a boat."

"Why bother? I have a better idea. We can each take a packing crate from the attic and row with a wooden spoon."

"I'm going to walk on stilts. I used to be a whiz at it when I was young."

"Jan Gies won't need to. He'll let his wife ride piggyback, and then Miep will be on stilts."

So now you have a rough idea of what's going on, don't you, Kit? This lighthearted banter is all very amusing, but reality will prove otherwise. The second question about the invasion was bound to arise: what should we do if the Germans evacuate Amsterdam?

"Leave the city along with the others. Disguise ourselves as well as we can."

"Whatever happens, don't go outside! The best thing to do is to stay put! The Germans are capable of herding the entire population of Holland into Germany, where they'll all die."

"Of course we'll stay here. This is the safest place.

We'll try to talk Kleiman and his family into coming here to live with us. We'll somehow get hold of a bag of wood shavings, so we can sleep on the floor. Let's ask Miep and Kleiman to bring some blankets, just in case. And we'll order some extra cereal grains to supplement the sixty-five pounds we already have. Jan can try to find some more beans. At the moment we've got about sixty-five pounds of beans and ten pounds of split peas. And don't forget the fifty cans of vegetables."

"What about the rest, Mother? Give us the latest figures.' ,

"Ten cans of fish, forty cans of milk, twenty pounds of powdered milk, three bottles of oil, four crocks of butter, four jars of meat, two big jars of strawberries, two jars of raspberries, twenty jars of tomatoes, ten pounds of oatmeal, nine pounds of rice. That's it."

Our provisions are holding out fairly well. All the same, we have to feed the office staff, which means dipping into our stock every week, so it's not as much as it seems. We have enough coal and firewood, candles too.

"Let's all make little moneybags to hide in our clothes so we can take our money with us if we need to leave here."

"We can make lists of what to take first in case we have to run for it, and pack our knapsacks in advance."

"When the time comes, we'll put two people on the lookout, one in the loft at the front of the house and one in the back."

"Hey, what's the use of so much food if there isn't any water, gas or electricity?"

"We'll have to cook on the wood stove. Filter the water and boil it. We should clean some big jugs and fill them with water. We can also store water in the three kettles we use for canning, and in the washtub."

"Besides, we still have about two hundred and thirty pounds of winter potatoes in the spice storeroom."

All day long that's all I hear. Invasion, invasion, nothing but invasion. Arguments about going hungry, dying, bombs, fire extinguishers, sleeping bags, identity cards, poison gas, etc., etc. Not exactly cheerful.

A good example of the explicit warnings of the male contingent is the following conversation with Jan:

Annex: "We're afraid that when the Germans retreat, they'll take the entire population with them."

Jan: "That's impossible. They haven't got enough trains."

Annex: "Trains? Do you really think they'd put civilians on trains? Absolutely not. Everyone would have to hoof it." (Or, as Dussel always says, per pedes apostolorum.)

Jan: "I can't believe that. You're always looking on the dark side. What reason would they have to round up all the civilians and take them along?"

Annex: "Don't you remember Goebbels saying that if the Germans have to go, they'll slam the doors to all the occupied territories behind them?"

Jan: "They've said a lot of things."

Annex: "Do you think the Germans are too noble or humane to do it? Their reasoning is: if we go under, we'll drag everyone else down with us."

Jan: "You can say what you like, I just don't believe

Annex: "It's always the same old story. No one wants to see the danger until it's staring them in the face."

Jan: "But you don't know anything for sure. You're just making an assumption."

Annex: "Because we've already been through it all ourselves, First in Germany and then here. What do you think's happening in Russia?"

Jan: "You shouldn't include the Jews. I don't think anyone knows what's going on in Russia. The British and the Russians are probably exaggerating for propaganda purposes, just like the Germans."

Annex: "Absolutely not. The BBC has always told the truth. And even if the news is slightly exaggerated, the facts are bad enough as they are. You can't deny that millions of peace-loving citizens in Poland and Russia have been murdered or gassed."

I'll spare you the rest of our conversations. I'm very calm and take no notice of all the fuss. I've reached the point where I hardly care whether I live or die. The world will keep on turning without me, and I can't do anything to change events anyway. I'll just let matters take their course and concentrate on studying and hope that everything will be all right in the end.

Yours, Anne

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 8, 1944

Dear Kitty,

I can't tell you how I feel. One minute I'm longing for peace and quiet, and the next for a little fun. We've forgotten how to laugh -- I mean, laughing so hard you can t stop.

This morning I had "the giggles"; you know, the kind we used to have at school. Margot and I were giggling like real teenagers.

Last night there was another scene with Mother. Margot was tucking her wool blanket around her when suddenly she leapt out of bed and carefully examined the blanket. What do you think she found? A pin! Mother had patched the blanket and forgotten to take it out. Father shook his head meaningfully and made a comment about how careless Mother is. Soon afterward Mother came in from the bathroom, and just to tease her I said, "Du bist doch eine echte Rabenmutter." [Oh, you are cruel.]

Of course, she asked me why I'd said that, and we told her about the pin she'd overlooked. She immediately assumed her haughtiest expression and said, "You're a fine one to talk. When you're sewing, the entire floor is covered with pins. And look, you've left the manicure set lying around again. You never put that away either!"

I said I hadn't used it, and Margot backed me up, since she was the guilty party.

Mother went on talking about how messy I was until I got fed up and said, rather curtly, "I wasn't even the one who said you were careless. I'm always getting blamed for other people's mistakes!"

Mother fell silent, and less than a minute later I was obliged to kiss her good-night. This incident may not have been very important, but these days everything gets on my nerves.

Anne Mary Frank

SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

The sun is shining, the sky is deep blue, there's a magnificent breeze, and I'm longing -- really longing -- for everything: conversation, freedom, friends, being alone. I long. . . to cry! I feel as if I were about to explode. I know crying would help, but I can't cry. I'm restless. I walk from one room to another, breathe through the crack in the window frame, feel my heart beating as if to say, "Fulfill my longing at last. . ."

I think spring is inside me. I feel spring awakening, I feel it in my entire body and soul. I have to force myself to act normally. I'm in a state of utter confusion, don't know what to read, what to write, what to do. I only know that I'm longing for something. . .

Yours, Anne

186 ANNE FRANK

MONDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

A lot has changed for me since Saturday. What's happened is this: I was longing for something (and still am), but. . . a small, a very small, part of the problem has been resolved.

On Sunday morning I noticed, to my great joy (I'll be honest with you), that Peter kept looking at me. Not in the usual way. I don't know, I can't explain it, but I suddenly had the feeling he wasn't as in love with Margot as I used to think. All day long I tried not to look at him too much, because whenever I did, I caught him looking at me and then -- well, it made me feel wonderful inside, and that's not a feeling I should have too often.

Sunday evening everyone, except Pim and me, was clustered around the radio, listening to the "Immortal Music of the German Masters." Dussel kept twisting and turning the knobs, which annoyed Peter, and the others too. After restraining himself for half an hour, Peter asked somewhat irritably if he would stop fiddling with the radio. Dussel replied in his haughtiest tone, "Ich mach' das schon!" [I'll decide that.] Peter got angry and made an insolent remark. Mr. van Daan sided with him, and Dussel had to back down. That was it.

The reason for the disagreement wasn't particularly interesting in and of itself, but Peter has apparently taken the matter very much to heart, because this morning, when I was rummaging around in the crate of books in the attic, Peter came up and began telling me what had happened. I didn't know anything about it, but Peter soon realized he'd found an attentive listener and started warming up to his subject.

"Well, it's like this," he said. "I don't usually talk much, since I know beforehand I'll just be tongue-tied. I start stuttering and blushing and I twist my words around so much I finally have to stop, because I can't find the right words. That's what happened yesterday. I meant to say something entirely different, but once I started, I got all mixed up. It's awful. I used to have a bad habit, and sometimes I wish I still did: whenever I was mad at someone, I'd beat them up instead of arguing with them. I know this method won't get me anywhere, and that's why I admire you. You're never at a loss for words: you say exactly what you want to say and aren't in the least bit shy."

"Oh, you're wrong about that," I replied. "Most of what I say comes out very differently from the way I'd planned. Plus I talk too much and too long, and that's just as bad."

"Maybe, but you have the advantage that no one can see you're embarrassed. You don't blush or go to pieces."

I couldn't help being secretly amused at his words. However, since I wanted him to go on talking quietly about himself, I hid my laughter, sat down on a cushion on the floor, wrapped my arms around my knees and gazed at him intently.

I'm glad there's someone else in this house who flies into the same rages as I do. Peter seemed relieved that he could criticize Dussel without being afraid I'd tell. As for me, I was pleased too, because I sensed a strong feeling of fellowship, which I only remember having had with my girlfriends.

Yours, Anne 

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 15, 1944

The minor run-in with Dussel had several repercussions, for which he had only himself to blame. Monday evening Dussel came in to see Mother and told her triumphantly that Peter had asked him that morning if he'd slept well, and then added how sorry he was about what had happened Sunday evening -- he hadn't really meant what he'd said. Dussel assured him he hadn't taken it to heart. So everYthing was right as rain again. Mother passed this story on to me, and I was secretly amazed that Peter, who'd been so angry at Dussel, had humbled himself, despite all his assurances to the contrary.

I couldn't refrain from sounding Peter out on the subject, and he instantly replied that Dussel had been lying. You should have seen Peter's face. I wish I'd had a camera. Indignation, rage, indecision, agitation and much more crossed his face in rapid succession.

That evening Mr. van Daan and Peter really told Dussel off. But it couldn't have been all that bad, since Peter had another dental appointment today.

Actually, they never wanted to speak to each other again.

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 16, 1944

Peter and I hadn't talked to each other all day, except for a few meaningless words. It was too cold to go up to the attic, and anyway, it was Margot's birthday. At twelve-thirty he came to look at the presents and hung around chatting longer than was strictly necessary, something he'd never have done otherwise. But I got my chance in the afternoon. Since I felt like spoiling Margot on her birthday, I went to get the coffee, and after that the potatoes. When I came to Peter's room, he immediately took his papers off the stairs, and I asked if I should close the trapdoor to the attic.

"Sure," he said, "go ahead. When you're ready to come back down, just knock and I'll open it for you."

I thanked him, went upstairs and spent at least ten minutes searching around in the barrel for the smallest potatoes. My back started aching, and the attic was cold. Naturally, I didn't bother to knock but opened the trap-door myself. But he obligingly got up and took the pan out of my hands.

"I did my best, but I couldn't find any smaller ones."

"Did you look in the big barrel?"

"Yes, I've been through them all."

By this time I was at the bottom of the stairs, and he examined the pan of potatoes he was still holding. "Oh, but these are fine," he said, and added, as I took the pan from him, "My compliments!"

As he said this, he gave me such a warm, tender look that I started glowing inside. I could tell he wanted to please me, but since he couldn't make a long complimentary speech, he said everything with his eyes. I understood him so well and was very grateful. It still makes me happy to think back to those words and that look!

When I went downstairs, Mother said she needed more potatoes, this time for dinner, so I volunteered to go back up. When I entered Peter's room, I apologized for disturbing him again. As I was going up the stairs, he stood up, went over to stand between the stairs and the wall, grabbed my arm and tried to stop me.

"I'll go," he said. "I have to go upstairs anyway."

I replied that it wasn't really necessary, that I didn't have to get only the small ones this time. Convinced, he let go of my arm. On my way back, he opened the trapdoor and once again took the pan from me. Standing by the door, I asked, "What are you working on?"

"French," he replied.

I asked if I could take a look at his lessons. Then I went to wash my hands and sat down across from him on the divan.

After I'd explained some French to him, we began to talk. He told me that after the war he wanted to go to the Dutch East Indies and live on a rubber plantation. He talked about his life at home, the black market and how he felt like a worthless bum. I told him he had a big inferiority complex. He talked about the war, saying that Russia and England were bound to go to war against each other, and about the Jews. He said life would have been much easier if he'd been a Christian or could become one after the war. I asked if he wanted to be baptized, but that wasn't what he meant either. He said he'd never be able to feel like a Christian, but that after the war he'd make sure nobody would know he was Jewish. I felt a momentary pang. It's such a shame he still has a touch of dishonesty in him.

Peter added, "The Jews have been and always will be the chosen people!"

I answered, "Just this once, I hope they'll be chosen for something good!"

But we went on chatting very pleasantly, about Father, about judging human character and all sorts of things, so many that I can't even remember them all.

I left at a quarter past five, because Bep had arrived.

That evening he said something else I thought was nice. We were talking about the picture of a movie star I'd once given him, which has been hanging in his room for at least a year and a half. He liked it so much that I offered to give him a few more.

"No," he replied, "I'd rather keep the one I've got. I look at it every day, and the people in it have become my friends."

I now have a better understanding of why he always hugs Mouschi so tightly. He obviously needs affection too. I forgot to mention something else he was talking about. He said, "No, I'm not afraid, except when it comes to things about myself, but I'm working on that."

Peter has a huge inferiority complex. For example, he always thinks he's so stupid and we're so smart. When I help him with French, he thanks me a thousand times. One of these days I'm going to say, "Oh, cut it out! You're much better at English and geography!"

Anne Frank

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 17, 1944

Dear Kitty,

I was upstairs this morning, since I promised Mrs. van D. I'd read her some of my stories. I began with "Eva's Dream," which she liked a lot, and then I read a few passages from "The Secret Annex," which had her in stitches. Peter also listened for a while (just the last part) and asked if I'd come to his room sometime to read more.

I decided I had to take a chance right then and there, so I got my notebook and let him read that bit where Cady and Hans talk about God. I can't really tell what kind of impression it made on him. He said something I don't quite remember, not about whether it was good, but about the idea behind it. I told him I just wanted him to see that I didn't write only amusing things. He nodded, and I left the room. We'll see if I hear anything more!

Yours, Anne Frank

FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 18, 1944

My dearest Kitty,

Whenever I go upstairs, it's always so I can see "him." Now that I have something to look forward to, my life here has improved greatly. 

At least the object of my friendship is always here, and I don't have to be afraid of rivals (except for Margot). Don't think I'm in love, because I'm not, but I do have the feeling that something beautiful is going to develop between Peter and me, a kind of friendship and a feeling of trust. I go see him whenever I get the chance, and it's not the way it used to be, when he didn't know what to make of me. On the contrary, he's still talking away as I'm heading out the door. Mother doesn't like me going upstairs. She always says I'm bothering Peter and that I should leave him alone. Honestly, can't she credit me with some intuition? She always looks at me so oddly when I go to Peter's room. When I come down again, she asks me where I've been. It's terrible, but I'm beginning to hate her!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 19, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

It's Saturday again, and that should tell you enough. This morning all was quiet. I spent nearly an hour upstairs making meatballs, but I only spoke to "him" in passing.

When everyone went upstairs at two-thirty to either read or take a nap, I went downstairs, with blanket and all, to sit at the desk and read or write. Before long I couldn't take it anymore. I put my head in my arms and sobbed my heart out. The tears streamed down my cheeks, and I felt desperately unhappy. Oh, if only' 'he" had come to comfort me.

It was past four by the time I went upstairs again. At five o'clock I set off to get some potatoes, hoping once again that we'd meet, but while I was still in the bathroom fixing my hair, he went to see Boche.

I wanted to help Mrs. van D. and went upstairs with my book and everything, but suddenly I felt the tears coming again. I raced downstairs to the bathroom, grabbing the hand mirror on the way. I sat there on the toilet, fully dressed, long after I was through, my tears leaving dark spots on the red of my apron, and I felt utterly dejected.

Here's what was going through my mind: "Oh, I'll never reach Peter this way. Who knows, maybe he doesn't even like me and he doesn't need anyone to confide in. Maybe he only thinks of me in a casual sort of way. I'll have to go back to being alone, without anyone to confide in and without Peter, without hope, comfort or anything to look forward to. Oh, if only I could rest my head on his shoulder and not feel so hopelessly alone and deserted! Who knows, maybe he doesn't care for me at all and looks at the others in the same tender way. Maybe I only imagined it was especially for me. Oh, Peter, if only you could hear me or see me. If the truth is disappointing, I won't be able to bear it."

A little later I felt hopeful and full of expectation again, though my tears were still flowing -- on the inside.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 20, 1944

What happens in other people's houses during the rest of the week happens here in the Annex on Sundays. While other people put on their best clothes and go strolling in the sun, we scrub, sweep and do the laundry.

Eight o'clock. Though the rest of us prefer to sleep in,

Dussel gets up at eight. He goes to the bathroom, then downstairs, then up again and then to the bathroom, where he devotes a whole hour to washing himself.

Nine-thirty. The stoves are lit, the blackout screen is taken down, and Mr. van Daan heads for the bathroom. One of my Sunday morning ordeals is having to lie in bed and look at Dussel's back when he's praying. I know it sounds strange, but a praying Dussel is a terrible sight to behold. It's not that he cries or gets sentimental, not at all, but he does spend a quarter of an hour -- an entire fifteen minutes -- rocking from his toes to his heels. Back and forth, back and forth. It goes on forever, and if I don't shut my eyes tight, my head starts to spin.

Ten-fifteen. The van Daans whistle; the bathroom's free. In the Frank family quarters, the first sleepy faces are beginning to emerge from their pillows. Then everything happens fast, fast, fast. Margot and I take turns doing the laundry. Since it's quite cold downstairs, we put on pants and head scarves. Meanwhile, Father is busy in the bathroom. Either Margot or I have a turn in the bathroom at eleven, and then we're all clean.

Eleven-thirty. Breakfast. I won't dwell on this, since there's enough talk about food without my bringing the subject up as well.

Twelve-fifteen. We each go our separate ways. Father, clad in overalls, gets down on his hands and knees and brushes the rug so vigorously that the room is enveloped in a cloud of dust. Mr. Dussel makes the beds (all wrong, of course), always whistling the same Beethoven violin concerto as he goes about his work. Mother can be heard shuffling around the attic as she hangs up the washing. Mr. van Daan puts on his hat and disappears into the lower regions, usually followed by Peter and Mouschi. Mrs. van D. dons a long apron, a black wool jacket and overshoes, winds a red wool scarf around her head, scoops up a bundle of dirty laundry and, with a well-rehearsed washerwoman's nod, heads downstairs. Margot and I do the dishes and straighten up the room.

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 23,1944

My dearest Kitty,

The weather's been wonderful since yesterday, and I've perked up quite a bit. My writing, the best thing I have, is coming along well. I go to the attic almost every morning to get the stale air out of my lungs. This morning when I went there, Peter was busy cleaning up. He finished quickly and came over to where I was sitting on my favorite spot on the floor. The two of us looked out at the blue sky, the bare chestnut tree glistening with dew, the seagulls and other birds glinting with silver as they swooped through the air, and we were so moved and entranced that we couldn't speak. He stood with his head against a thick beam, while I sat. We breathed in the air, looked outside and both felt that the spell shouldn't be broken with words. We remained like this for a long while, and by the time he had to go to the loft to chop wood, I knew he was a good, decent boy. He climbed the ladder to the loft, and I followed; during the fifteen minutes he was chopping wood, we didn't say a word either. I watched him from where I was standing, and could see he was obviously doing his best to chop the right way and show off his strength. But I also looked out the open window, letting my eyes roam over a large part of Amsterdam, over the rooftops and on to the horizon, a strip of blue so pale it was almost invisible.

"As long as this exists," I thought, "this sunshine and this cloudless sky, and as long as I can enjoy it, how can I be sad?"

The best remedy for those who are frightened, lonely or unhappy is to go outside, somewhere they can be alone, alone with the sky, nature and God. For then and only then can you feel that everything is as it should be and that God wants people to be happy amid nature's beauty and simplicity.

As long as this exists, and that should be forever, I know that there will be solace for every sorrow, whatever the circumstances. I firmly believe that nature can bring comfort to all who suffer.

Oh, who knows, perhaps it won't be long before I can share this overwhelming feeling of happiness with someone who feels the same as I do.

Yours, Anne

P.S. Thoughts: To Peter.

We've been missing out on so much here, so very much, and for such a long time. I miss it just as much as you do. I'm not talking about external things, since we're well provided for in that sense; I mean the internal things. Like you, I long for freedom and fresh air, but I think we've been amply compensated for their loss. On the inside, I mean.

This morning, when I was sitting in front of the window and taking a long, deep look outside at God and nature, I was happy, just plain happy. Peter, as long as people feel that kind of happiness within themselves, the joy of nature, health and much more besides, they'll always be able to recapture that happiness.

Riches, prestige, everything can be lost. But the happiness in your own heart can only be dimmed; it will always be there, as long as you live, to make you happy again.

Whenever you're feeling lonely or sad, try going to the loft on a beautiful day and looking outside. Not at the houses and the rooftops, but at the sky. As long as you can look fearlessly at the sky, you'll know that you're pure within and will find happiness once more.

SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 27, 1944

My dearest Kitty,

From early in the morning to late at night, all I do is think about Peter. I fall asleep with his image before my eyes, dream about him and wake up with him still looking at me.

I have the strong feeling that Peter and I aren't really as different as we may seem on the surface, and I'll explain why: neither Peter nor I have a mother. His is too superficial, likes to flirt and doesn't concern herself much with what goes on in his head. Mine takes an active interest in my life, but has no tact, sensitivity or motherly understanding.

Both Peter and I are struggling with our innermost feelings. We're still unsure of ourselves and are too vulnerable, emotionally, to be dealt with so roughly. Whenever that happens, I want to run outside or hide my feelings. Instead, I bang the pots and pans, splash the water and am generally noisy, so that everyone wishes I were miles away. Peter's reaction is to shut himself up, say little, sit quietly and daydream, all the while carefully hiding his true self.

But how and when will we finally reach each other?

I don't know how much longer I can continue to keep this yearning under control.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

MONDAY, FEBRUARY 28, 1944

My dearest Kitty,

It's like a nightmare, one that goes on long after I'm awake. I see him nearly every hour of the day and yet I can't be with him, I can't let the others notice, and I have to pretend to be cheerful, though my heart is aching.

Peter Schiff and Peter van Daan have melted into one Peter, who's good and kind and whom I long for desperately. Mother's horrible, Father's nice, which makes him even more exasperating, and Margot's the worst, since she takes advantage of my smiling face to claim me for herself, when all I want is to be left alone.

Peter didn't join me in the attic, but went up to the loft to do some carpentry work. At every rasp and bang, another chunk of my courage broke off and I was even more unhappy. In the distance a clock was tolling' 'Be pure in heart, be pure in mind!"

I'm sentimental, I know. I'm despondent and foolish, I know that too.

Oh, help me!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 1, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

My own affairs have been pushed to the background by . . . a break-in. I'm boring you with all my break-ins, but what can I do when burglars take such pleasure in honoring Gies & Go. with their presence? This incident is much more complicated than the last one, in July 1943.

Last night at seven-thirty Mr. van Daan was heading, as usual, for Mr. Kugler's office when he saw that both the glass door and the office door were open. He was surprised, but he went on through and was even more astonished to see that the alcove doors were open as well and that there was a terrible mess in the front office.

"There's been a burglary" flashed through his mind. But just to make sure, he went downstairs to the front door, checked the lock and found everything closed. "Bep and

Peter must just have been very careless this evening," Mr. van. D. concluded. He remained for a while in Mr. Kugler's office, switched off the lamp and went upstairs without worrying much about the open doors or the messy office.

Early this morning Peter knocked at our door to tell us that the front door was wide open and that the projector and Mr. Kugler's new briefcase had disappeared from the closet. Peter was instructed to lock the door. Mr. van Daan told us his discoveries of the night before, and we were extremely worried.

The only explanation is that the burglar must have had a duplicate key, since there were no signs of a forced entry. He must have sneaked in early in the evening, shut the door behind him, hidden himself when he heard Mr. van Daan, fled with the loot after Mr. van Daan went upstairs and, in his hurry, not bothered to shut the door.

Who could have our key? Why didn't the burglar go to the warehouse? Was it one of our own warehouse employees, and will he turn us in, now that he's heard Mr. van Daan and maybe even seen him?

It's really scary, since we don't know whether the burglar will take it into his head to try and get in again. Or was he so startled when he heard someone else in the building that he'll stay away? 

Yours, Anne 

P.S. We'd be delighted if you could hunt up a good detective for us. Obviously, there's one condotion: he must be relied upon not to mform on people in hiding.

THURSDAY, MARCH 2, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Margot and I were in the attic together today. I can't enjoy being there with her the way I imagine it'd be with Peter (or someone else). I know she feels the same about most things as I do!

While doing the dishes, Bep began talking to Mother and Mrs. van Daan about how discouraged she gets. What help did those two offer her? Our tactless mother, especially, only made things go from bad to worse. Do you know what her advice was? That she should think about all the other people in the world who are suffering! How can thinking about the misery of others help if you're miserable yourself? I said as much. Their response, of course, was that I should stay out of conversations of this sort.

The grown-ups are such idiots! As if Peter, Margot, Bep and I didn't all have the same feelings. The only thing that helps is a mother's love, or that of a very, very close friend. But these two mothers don't understand the first thing about us! Perhaps Mrs. van Daan does, a bit more than Mother. Oh, I wish I could have said something to poor Bep, something that I know from my own experience would have helped. But Father came between us, pushing me roughly aside. They're all so stupid!

I also talked to Margot about Father and Mother, about how nice it could be here if they weren't so aggravating. We'd be able to organize evenings in which everyone could take turns discussing a given subject. But we've already been through all that. It's impossible for me to talk here! Mr. van Daan goes on the offensive, Mother i gets sarcastic and can't say anythina in a normal voice, Father doesn't feel like taking part, nor does Mr. Dussel, and Mrs. van D. is attacked so often that she just sits there with a red face, hardly able to put up a fight anymore. And what about us? We aren't allowed to have an opinion! My, my, aren't they progressive! Not have an opinion! People can tell you to shut up, but they can't keep you from having an opinion. You can't forbid someone to have an opinion, no matter how young they are! The only thing that would help Bep, Margot, Peter and me would be great love and devotion, which we don't get here. And no one, especially not the idiotic sages around here, is capable of understanding us, since we're more sensitive and much more advanced in our thinking than any of them ever suspect!

Love, what is love? I don't think you can really put it into words. Love is understanding someone, caring for him, sharing his joys and sorrows. This eventually includes physical love. You've shared something, given something away and received something in return, whether or not you're married, whether or not you have a baby. Losing your virtue doesn't matter, as long as you know that for as long as you live you'll have someone at your side who understands you, and who doesn't have to be shared with anyone else!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

At the moment, Mother's grouching at me again; she's clearly jealous because I talk to Mrs. van Daan more than to her. What do I care!

I managed to get hold of Peter this afternoon, and we talked for at least forty-five minutes. He wanted to tell me something about himself, but didn't find it easy. He finally got it out, though it took a long time. I honestly didn't know whether it was better for me to stay or to go. But I wanted so much to help him! I told him about Bep and how tactless our mothers are. He told me that his parents fight constantly, about politics and cigarettes and all kinds of things. As I've told you before, Peter's very shy, but not too shy to admit that he'd be perfectly happy not to see his parents for a year or two. "My father isn't as nice as he looks," he said. "But in the matter of the cigarettes, Mother's absolutely right."

I also told him about my mother. But he came to Father's defense. He thought he was a "terrific guy."

Tonight when I was hanging up my apron after doing the dishes, he called me over and asked me not to say anything downstairs about his parents' having had another argument and not being on speaking terms. I promised, though I'd already told Margot. But I'm sure Margot won't pass it on.

"Oh no, Peter," I said, you don't have to worry about me. I've learned not to blab everything I hear. I never repeat what you tell me."

He was glad to hear that. I also told him what terrible gossips we are, and said, "Margot's quite right, of course, when she says I'm not being honest, because as much as I want to stop gossiping, there's nothing I like better than discussing Mr. Dussel."

"It's good that you admit it," he said. He blushed, and his sincere compliment almost embarrassed me too.

Then we talked about "upstairs" and "downstairs" some more. Peter was really rather surprised to hear that don't like his parents. "Peter," I said, "you know I'm always honest, so why shouldn't I tell you this as well? We can see their faults too."

I added, "Peter, I'd really like to help you. Will you let me? You're caught in an awkward position, and I know, even though you don't say anything, that it upsets you."

"Oh, your help is always welcome!"

"Maybe it'd be better for you to talk to Father. You can tell him anything, he won't pass it on."

"I know, he's a real pal."

"You like him a lot, don't you?"

Peter nodded, and I continued, "Well, he likes you too, you know!"

He looked up quickly and blushed. It was really touching to see how happy these few words made him.

"You think so?" he asked.

"Yes," I said. "You can tell from the little things he lets slip now and then."

Then Mr. van Daan came in to do some dictating.

Peter's a "terrific guy," just like Father!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

FRIDAY, MARCH 3,1944

My dearest Kitty,

When I looked into the candle tonight, I felt calm and happy again. It seems Grandma is in that candle, and it's Grandma who watches over and protects me and makes me feel happy again. But. . . there's someone else who governs all my moods and that's. . . Peter. I went to get the potatoes today, and while I was standing on the stairway with my pan full, he asked, "What did you do during the lunch break?"

I sat down on the stairs, and we began to talk. The potatoes didn't make it to the kitchen until five-fifteen (an hour after I'd gone to get them). Peter didn't say anything more about his parents; we just talked about books and about the past. Oh, he gazes at me with such warmth in his eyes; I don't think it will take much for me to fall in love with him.

He brought the subject up this evening. I went to his room after peeling potatoes and remarked on how hot it was. "You can tell the temperature by looking at Margot and me, because we turn white when it's cold and red when it's hot." I said.

"In love?" he asked.

"Why should I be in love?" It was a pretty silly answer (or, rather, question).

"Why not?" he said, and then it was time for dinner.

What did he mean? Today I finally managed to ask him whether my chatter bothered him. All he said was,

"Oh, it's fine with me!" I can't tell how much of his reply was due to shyness.

Kitty, I sound like someone who's in love and can talk about nothing but her dearest darling. And Peter is a darling. Will I ever be able to tell him that? Only if he thinks the same of me, but I'm the kind of person you have to treat with kid gloves, I know that all too well.

And he likes to be left alone, so I don't know how much he likes me. In any case, we're getting to know each other a little better. I wish we dared to say more. But who knows, maybe that time will come sooner than I think!

Once or twice a day he gives me a knowing glance, I wink back, and we're both happy. It seems crazy to talk about his being happy, and yet I have the overwhelming feeling he thinks the same way I do.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

SATURDAY, MARCH 4, 1944

Dear Kitty,

This is the first Saturday in months that hasn't been tiresome, dreary and boring. The reason is Peter. This morning as I was on my way to the attic to hang up my apron, Father asked whether I wanted to stay and practice my French, and I said yes. We spoke French together for a while and I explained something to Peter, and then we worked on our English. Father read aloud from Dickens, and I was in seventh heaven, since I was sitting on Father's chair, close to Peter.

I went downstairs at quarter to eleven. When I went back up at eleven-thirty, Peter was already waiting for me on the stairs. We talked until quarter to one. Whenever I leave the room, for example after a meal, and Peter has a chance and no one else can hear, he says, "Bye, Anne, see you later."

Oh, I'm so happy! I wonder if he's going to fall in love with me after all? In any case, he's a nice boy, and you have no idea how good it is to talk to him!

Mrs. van D. thinks it's all right for me to talk to

Peter, but today she asked me teasingly, "Can I trust you two up there?"

"Of course," I protested. "I take that as an insult!"

Morning, noon and night, I look forward to seeing Peter.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

PS. Before I forget, last night everything was blanketed in snow. Now it's thawed and there's almost nothing left.

MONDAY, MARCH 6, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Ever since Peter told me about his parents, I've felt a certain sense of responsibthty toward him-don't you think that's strange? It's as though their quarrels were just as much my business as his, and yet I don't dare bring it up anymore, because I'm afraid it makes him uncomfortable. I wouldn't want to intrude, not for all the money in the world.

I can tell by Peter's face that he ponders things just as deeply as I do. Last night I was annoyed when Mrs. van D. scoffed, "The thinker!" Peter flushed and looked embarrassed, and I nearly blew my top.

Why don't these people keep their mouths shut?

You can't imagine what it's like to have to stand on the sidelines and see how lonely he is, without being able to do anything. I can imagine, as if I were in his place, how despondent he must sometimes feel at the quarrels. And about love. Poor Peter, he needs to be loved so much!

It sounded so cold when he said he didn't need any friends. Oh, he's so wrong! I don't think he means it. He clings to his masculinity, his solitude and his feigned indif- ference so he can maintain his role, so he'll never, ever have to show his feelings. Poor Peter, how long can he keep it up? Won't he explode from this superhuman effort?

Oh, Peter, if only I could help you, if only you would let me! Together we could banish our loneliness, yours and mine!

I've been doing a great deal of thinking, but not saying much. I'm happy when I see him, and happier still if the sun shines when we're together. I washed my hair yesterday, and because I knew he was next door, I was very rambunctious. I couldn't help it; the more quiet and serious I am on the inside, the noisier I get on the outside!

Who will be the first to discover the chink in my armor?

It's just as well that the van Daans don't have a daughter. My conquest could never be so challenging, so beautiful and so nice with someone of the same sex!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

PS. You know I'm always honest with you, so I think I should tell you that I live from one encounter to the next. I keep hoping to discover that he's dying to see me, and I'm in raptures when I notice his bashful attempts. I think he'd like to be able to express himself as easily as I do; little does he know it's his awkwardness that I find so touching.

TUESDAY, MARCH 7,1944

Dearest Kitty,

When I think back to my life in 1942, it all seems so unreal. The Anne Frank who enjoyed that heavenly existence was completely different from the one who has grown wise within these walls. Yes, it was heavenly. Five admirers on every street corner, twenty or so friends, the favorite of most of my teachers, spoiled rotten by Father and Mother, bags full of candy and a big allowance. What more could anyone ask for?

You're probably wondering how I could have charmed all those people. Peter says It s ecause I m "attractive," but that isn't it entirely. The teachers were amused and entertained by my clever answers, my witty remarks, my smthng face and my critical mind. That's all I was: a terrible flirt, coquettish and amusing. I had a few plus points, which kept me in everybody's good graces: I was hardworking, honest and generous. I would never have refused anyone who wanted to peek at my answers, I was magnanimous with my candy, and I wasn't stuck-up.

Would all that admiration eventually have made me overconfident? It's a good thing that, at the height of my glory, I was suddenly plunged into reality. It took me more than a year to get used to doing without admiration.

How did they see me at school? As the class comedian, the eternal ringleader, never in a bad mood, never a crybaby. Was it any wonder that everyone wanted to bicycle to school with me or do me little favors?

I look back at that Anne Frank as a pleasant, amusing, but superficial girl, who has nothing to do with me. What did Peter say about me? "Whenever I saw you, you were surrounded by a flock of girls and at least two boys, you were always laughing, and you were always the center of attention!" He was right.

What's remained of that Anne Frank? Oh, I haven't forgotten how to laugh or toss off a remark, I'm just as good, if not better, at raking people over the coals, and I can still flirt and be amusing, if I want to be . . .

But there's the catch. I'd like to live that seemingly carefree and happy life for an evening, a few days, a week. At the end of that week I'd be exhausted, and would be grateful to the first person to talk to me about something meaningful. I want friends, not admirers. Peo- ple who respect me for my character and my deeds, not my flattering smile. The circle around me would be much smaller, but what does that matter, as long as they're sincere?

In spite of everything, I wasn't altogether happy in 1942; I often felt I'd been deserted, but because I was on the go all day long, I didn't think about it. I enjoyed myself as much as I could, trying consciously or unconsciously to fill the void with jokes.

Looking back, I realize that this period of my life has irrevocably come to a close; my happy-go-lucky, carefree schooldays are gone forever. I don't even miss them. I've outgrown them. I can no longer just kid around, since my serious side is always there.

I see my life up to New Year's 1944 as if I were looking through a powerful magnifying glass. When I was at home, my life was filled with sunshine. Then, in the middle of 1942, everything changed overnight. The quarrels, the accusations -- I couldn't take it all in. I was caught off guard, and the only way I knew to keep my bearings was to talk back.

The first half of 1943 brought crying spells, loneliness and the gradual realization of my faults and short- comings, which were numerous and seemed even more so. I filled the day with chatter, tried to draw Pim closer to me and failed. This left me on my own to face the difficult task of improving myself so I wouldn't have to hear their reproaches, because they made me so despondent.

The second half of the year was slightly better. I became a teenager, and was treated more like a grown-up. I began to think about things and to write stories, finally coming to the conclusion that the others no longer had anything to do with me. They had no right to swing me back and forth like a pendulum on a clock. I wanted to change myself in my own way. I realized I could man- age without my mother, completely and totally, and that hurt. But what affected me even more was the realization that I was never going to be able to confide in Father. I didn't trust anyone but myself.

After New Year's the second big change occurred: my dream, through which I discovered my longing for . . . a boy; not for a girlfriend, but for a boyfriend. I also discovered an inner happiness underneath my superficial and cheerful exterior. From time to time I was quiet. Now I live only for Peter, since what happens to me in the future depends largely on him!

I lie in bed at night, after ending my prayers with the words "Ich Janke air fur all das Cute una Liebe una Schone,"* [* Thank you, God, for all that is good and dear and beautiful.] and I'm filled with joy. I think of going into hiding, my health and my whole being as das Cute; Peter's love (which is still so new and fragile and which neither of us dares to say aloud), the future, happiness and love as das Liebe; the world, nature and the tremendous beauty of everything, all that splendor, as das Schone.

At such moments I don't think about all the misery, but about the beauty that still remains. This is where Mother and I differ greatly. Her advice in the face of melancholy is: "Think about all the suffering in the world and be thankful you're not part of it." My advice is: "Go outside, to the country, enjoy the sun and all nature has to offer. Go outside and try to recapture the happiness within yourself; think of all the beauty in yourself and in everything around you and be happy."

I don't think Mother's advice can be right, because what are you supposed to do if you become part of the suffering? You'd be completely lost. On the contrary, beauty remains, even in misfortune. If you just look for it, you discover more and more happiness and regain your balance. A person who's happy will make others happy; a person who has courage and faith will never die in misery!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 8, 1944

Margot and I have been writing each other notes, just for fun, of course.

Anne: It's strange, but I can only remember the day after what has happened the night before. For example, I suddenly remembered that Mr. Dussel was snoring loudly last night. (It's now quarter to three on Wednesday af- ternoon and Mr. Dussel is snoring again, which is why it flashed through my mind, of course.) When I had to use the potty, I deliberately made more noise to get the snoring to stop.

Margot: Which is better, the snoring or the gasping for air?

Anne: The snoring's better, because it stops when I make noise, without waking the person in question.

What I didn't write to Margot, but what I'll confess to you, dear Kitty, is that I've been dreaming of Peter a great deal. The night before last I dreamed I was skating right here in our living room with that little boy from the Apollo ice-skating rink; he was with his sister, the girl with the spindly legs who always wore the same blue dress. I introduced myself, overdoing it a bit, and asked him his name. It was Peter. In my dream I wondered just how many Peters I actually knew!

Then I dreamed we were standing in Peter's room, facing each other beside the stairs. I said something to him; he gave me a kiss, but replied that he didn't love me all that much and that I shouldn't flirt. In a desperate and pleading voice I said, "I'm not flirting, Peter!"

When I woke up, I was glad Peter hasn't said it after all.

Last night I dreamed we were kissing each other, but

Peter's cheeks were very disappointing: they weren't as soft as they looked. They were more like Father's cheeks -- the cheeks of a man who already shaves.

FRIDAY, MARCH 10, 1944

My dearest Kitty,

The proverb "Misfortunes never come singly" defi- nitely applies to today. Peter just got through saying it. Let me tell you all the awful things that have happened and that are still hanging over our heads.

First, Miep is sick, as a result of Henk and Aagje's wedding yesterday. She caught cold in the Westerkerk, where the service was held. Second, Mr. Kleiman hasn't returned to work since the last time his stomach started bleeding, so Bep's been left to hold down the fort alone. Third, the police have arrested a man (whose name I won't put in writing). It's terrible not only for him, but for us as well, since he's been supplying us with potatoes, butter and jam. Mr. M., as I'll call him, has five children under the age of thirteen, and another on the way.

Last night we had another little scare: we were in the middle of dinner when suddenly someone knocked on the wall next door. For the rest of the evening we were nervous and gloomy.

Lately I haven't been at all in the mood to write down what's been going on here. I've been more wrapped up in myself. Don't get me wrong, I'm terribly upset about what's happened to poor, good-hearted Mr. M., but there's not much room for him in my diary.

Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday I was in Peter's room from four-thirty to five-fifteen. We worked on our French and chatted about one thing and another. I really look forward to that hour or so in the afternoon, but best of all is that I think Peter's just as pleased to see me.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 213

SATURDAY, MARCH 11, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

I haven't been able to sit still lately. I wander up- stairs and down and then back again. I like talking to Peter, but I'm always afraid of being a nuisance. He's told me a bit about the past, about his parents and about himself, but it's not enough, and every five minutes I wonder why I find myself longing for more. He used to think I was a real pain in the neck, and the feeling was mutual. I've changed my mind, but how do I know he's changed his? I think he has, but that doesn't necessarily mean we have to become the best of friends, although as far as I'm concerned, it would make our time here more bearable. But I won't let this drive me crazy. I spend enough time thinking about him and don't have to get you all worked up as well, simply because I'm so miserable!

SUNDAY, MARCH 12, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Things are getting crazier here as the days go by.

Peter hasn't looked at me since yesterday. He's been acting as if he's mad at me. I'm doing my best not to chase after him and to talk to him as little as possible, but it's not easy! What's going on, what makes him keep me at arm's length one minute and rush back to my side the next? Perhaps I'm imagining that it's worse than it really is. Perhaps he's just moody like me, and tomorrow everything will be all right again!

I have the hardest time trying to maintain a normal facade when I'm feeling so wretched and sad. I have to talk, help around the house, sit with the others and, above all, act cheerful! Most of all I miss the outdoors and having a place where I can be alone for as long as I want! I think I'm getting everything all mixed up, Kitty, but then, I'm in a state of utter confusion: on the one hand, I'm half crazy with desire for him, can hardly be in the same room without looking at him; and on the other hand, I wonder why he should matter to me so much and why I can't be calm again! 

Day and night, during every waking hour, I do nothing but ask myself, "Have you given him enough chance to be alone? Have you been spending too much time upstairs? Do you talk too much about serious subjects he's not yet ready to talk about? Maybe he doesn't even like you? Has it all been your imagination? But then why has he told you so much about himself? Is he sorry he did?" And a whole lot more.

Yesterday afternoon I was so worn out by the sad news from the outside that I lay down on my divan for a nap. All I wanted was to sleep and not have to think. I slept until four, but then I had to go next door. It wasn't easy, answering all Mother's questions and inventing an excuse to explain my nap to Father. I pleaded a headache, which wasn't a lie, since I did have one. . . on the inside!

Ordinary people, ordinary girls, teenagers like myself, would think I'm a little nuts with all my self-pity. But that's just it. I pour my heart out to you, and the rest of the time I'm as impudent, cheerful and self-confident as possible to avoid questions and keep from getting on my own nerves.

Margot is very kind and would like me to confide in her, but I can't tell her everything. She takes me too seriously, far too seriously, and spends a lot of time thinking about her loony sister, looking at me closely whenever I open my mouth and wondering, "Is she acting, or does she really mean it?"

It's because we're always together. I don't want the person I confide in to be around me all the time. When will I untangle my jumbled thoughts? When will I find inner peace again?

Yours, Anne

TUESDAY, MARCH 14, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

It might be amusing for you (though not for me) to hear what we're going to eat today. The cleaning lady is working downstairs, so at the moment I'm seated at the van Daans' oilcloth-covered table with a handkerchief sprinkled with fragrant prewar perfume pressed to my nose and mouth. You probably don't have the faintest idea what I'm talking about, so let me "begin at the begin- ning." The people who supply us with food coupons have been arrested, so we have just our five black-market ra- -, tion books-no coupons, no fats and oils. Since Miep and Mr. Kleiman are sick again, Bep can't manage the shop- ping. The food is wretched, and so are we. As of tomor- row, we won't have a scrap of fat, butter or margarine. We can't eat fried potatoes for breakfast (which we've been doing to save on bread), so we're having hot cereal instead, and because Mrs. van D. thinks we're starving, we bought some half-and-half. Lunch today consists of mashed potatoes and pickled kale. This explains the precautionary measure with the handkerchief. You wouldn't believe how much kale can stink when it's a few years old! The kitchen smells like a mixture of spoiled plums, rotten eggs and brine. Ugh, just the thought of having to eat that muck makes me want to throw up! Besides that, our potatoes have contracted such strange diseases that one out of every two buckets of pommes de terre winds up in the garbage. We entertain ourselves by trying to figure out which disease they've got, and we've reached the conclusion that they suffer from cancer, smallpox and measles. Honestly, being in hiding during the fourth year of the war is no picnic. If only the whole stinking mess were over!

To tell you the truth, the food wouldn't matter so much to me if life here were more pleasant in other ways. But that's just it: this tedious existence is starting to make us all disagreeable. Here are the opinions of the five grown-ups on the present situation (children aren't allowed to have opinions, and for once I'm sticking to the rules):

Mrs. van Daan: "I'd stopped wanting to be queen of the kitchen long ago. But sitting around doing nothing was boring, so I went back to cooking. Still, I can't help complaining: it's impossible to cook without oil, and all those disgusting smells make me sick to my stomach. Besides, what do I get in return for my efforts? Ingratitude and rude remarks. I'm always the black sheep; I get blamed for everything. What's more, it's my opinion that the war is making very little progress. The Germans will win in the end. I'm terrified that we're going to starve, and when I'm in a bad mood, I snap at everyone who comes near."

Mr. van Daan: "I just smoke and smoke and smoke. Then the food, the political situation and Kerli's moods don't seem so bad. Kerli's a sweetheart. If I don't have anything to smoke, I get sick, then I need to eat meat, life becomes unbearable, nothing's good enough, and there's bound to be a flaming row. My Kerli's an idiot."

Mrs. Frank: "Food's not very important, but I'd love a slice of rye bread right now, because I'm so hungry. If I were Mrs. van Daan, I'd have put a stop to Mr. van Daan's smoking long ago. But I desperately need a cigarette now, because my head's in such a whirl. The van Daans are horrible people; the English may make a lot of mistakes, but the war is progressing. I should keep my mouth shut and be grateful I'm not in Poland."

Mr. Frank: "Everything's fine, I don't need a thing. Stay calm, we've got plenty of time. Just give me my potatoes, and I'll be quiet. Better set aside some of my rations for Bep. The political situation is improving, I'm extremely optimistic."

Mr. Dussel: "I must complete the task I've set for myself, everything must be finished on time. The political situation is looking 'gut,' it's 'eempossible' for us to get caught. Me, me, me . . . ."

Yours, Anne

THURSDAY, MARCH 16, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Whew! Released from the gloom and doom for a few moments! All I've been hearing today is: "If this and that happens, we're in trouble, and if so-and-so gets sick, we'll be left to fend for ourselves, and if . . ."

Well, you know the rest, or at any rate I assume you're famthar enough with the residents of the Annex to guess what they'd be talking about.

The reason for all the "ifs" is that Mr. Kugler has been called up for a six-day work detail, Bep is down with a bad cold and will probably have to stay home tomorrow, Miep hasn't gotten over her flu, and Mr. Kleiman's stom- ach bled so much he lost consciousness. What a tale of woe!

We think Mr. Kugler should go directly to a reliable doctor for a medical certificate of ill health, which he can present to the City Hall in Hilversum. The warehouse -- employees have been given a day off tomorrow, so Bep will be alone in the office. If (there's another "if') Bep has to stay home, the door will remain locked and we'll have to be as quiet as mice so the Keg Company won't hear us. At one o'clock Jan will come for half an hour to check on us poor forsaken souls, like a zookeeper.

This afternoon, for the first time in ages, Jan gave us some news of the outside world. You should have seen us gathered around him; it looked exactly like a print: "At Grandmother's Knee."

He regaled his grateful audience with talk of-what else?-food. Mrs. P., a friend of Miep's, has been cooking his meals. The day before yesterday Jan ate carrots with green peas, yesterday he had the leftovers, today she's cooking marrowfat peas, and tomorrow she's plan- ning to mash the remaining carrots with potatoes.

We asked about Miep's doctor.

"Doctor?" said Jan. "What doctor? I called him this morning and got his secretary on the line. I asked for a flu prescription and was told I could come pick it up tomor- row morning between eight and nine. If you've got a particularly bad case of flu, the doctor himself comes to the phone and says, 'Stick out your tongue and say "Aah." Oh, I can hear it, your throat's infected. I'll write out a prescription and you can bring it to the phar- macy. Good day.' And that's that. Easy job he's got, diagnosis by phone. But I shouldn't blame the doctors." After all, a person has only two hands, and these days there're too many patients and too few doctors."

Still, we all had a good laugh at Jan's phone call. I can just imagine what a doctor's waiting room looks like these days. Doctors no longer turn up their noses at the poorer patients, but at those with minor illnesses. "Hey, what are you doing here?" they think. "Go to the end of the line; real patients have priority!"

Yours, Anne

THURSDAY, MARCH 16, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

The weather is gorgeous, indescribably beautiful; I'll be going up to the attic in a moment.

I now know why I'm so much more restless than Peter. He has his own room, where he can work, dream, think and sleep. I'm constantly being chased from one corner to another. I'm never alone in the room I share with Dussel, though I long to be so much. That's another reason I take refuge in the attic. When I'm there, or with you, I can be myself, at least for a little while. Still, I don't want to moan and groan. On the contrary, I want to be brave!

Thank goodness the others notice nothing of my innermost feelings, except that every day I'm growing cooler and more contemptuous of Mother, less affection- ate to Father and less willing to share a single thought with Margot; I'm closed up tighter than a drum. Above all, I have to maintain my air of confidence. No one must know that my heart and mind are constantly at war with each other. Up to now reason has always won the battle, but will my emotions get the upper hand? Sometimes I fear they will, but more often I actually hope they do!

Oh, it's so terribly hard not to talk to Peter about these things, but I know I have to let him begin; it's so hard to act during the daytime as if everything I've said and done in my dreams had never taken place! Kitty, Anne is crazy, but then these are crazy times and even crazier circumstances.

The nicest part is being able to write down all my thoughts and feelings; otherwise, I'd absolutely suffocate. I wonder what Peter thinks about all these things? I keep thinking I'll be able to talk to him about them one day. He must have guessed something about the inner me, since he couldn't possibly love the outer Anne he's known so far! How could someone like Peter, who loves peace and quiet, possibly stand my bustle and noise? Will he be the first and only person to see what's beneath my granite mask? Will it take him long? Isn't there some old saying about love being akin to pity? Isn't that what's happening here as well? Because I often pity him as much as I do myself!

I honestly don't know how to begin, I really don't, so how can I expect Peter to when talking is so much harder for him? If only I could write to him, then at least he'd know what I was trying to say, since it's so hard to say it out loud!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

FRIDAY, MARCH 17, 1944

My dearest darling,

Everything turned out all right after all; Bep just had a sore throat, not the flu, and Mr. Kugler got a medical certificate to excuse him from the work detail. The entire Annex breathed a huge sigh of relief. Everything's fine here! Except that Margot and I are rather tired of our parents.

Don't get me wrong. I still love Father as much as ever and Margot loves both Father and Mother, but when you're as old as we are, you want to make a few decisions for yourself, get out from under their thumb. Whenever I go upstairs, they ask what I'm going to do, they won't let me salt my food, Mother asks me every evening at eight-fifteen if it isn't time for me to change into my nighty, I and they have to approve every book I read. I must admit, they're not at all strict about that and let me read nearly everything, but Margot and I are sick and tired of having to listen to their comments and questions all day long.

There's something else that displeases them: I no longer feel like giving them little kisses morning, noon and night. All those cute nicknames seem so affected, and Father's fondness for talking about farting and going to the bathroom is disgusting. In short, I'd like nothing better than to do without their company for a while, and they don't understand that. Not that Margot and I have ever said any of this to them. What would be the point? They wouldn't understand anyway.

Margot said last night, "What really bothers me is that if you happen to put your head in your hands and sigh once or twice, they immediately ask whether you have a headache or don't feel well."

For both of us, it's been quite a blow to suddenly realize that very little remains of the close and harmoni- ous family we used to have at home! This is mostly because everything's out of kilter here. By that I mean that we're treated like children when it comes to external matters, while, inwardly, we're much older than other girls our age. Even though I'm only fourteen, I know what I want, I know who's right and who's wrong, I have my own opinions, ideas and principles, and though it may sound odd coming from a teenager, I feel I'm more of a person than a child -- I feel I'm completely independent of others. I know I'm better at debating or carrying on a discussion than Mother, I know I'm more objective, I don't exaggerate as much, I'm much tidier and better with my hands, and because of that I feel (this may make you laugh) that I'm superior to her in many ways. To love someone, I have to admire and respect the person, but I feel neither respect nor admiration for Mother!

Everything would be all right if only I had Peter, since I admire him in many ways. He's so decent and clever!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

SATURDAY, MARCH 18, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

I've told you more about myself and my feelings than I've ever told a living soul, so why shouldn't that include sex?

Parents, and people in general, are very peculiar when it comes to sex. Instead of telling their sons and daughters everything at the age of twelve, they send the children out of the room the moment the subject arises and leave them to find out everything on their own. Later on, when parents notice that their children have, somehow, come by their information, they assume they know more (or less) than they actually do. So why don't they try to make amends by asking them what's what?

A major stumbling block for the adults -- though in my opinion it's no more than a pebble -- is that they're afraid their children will no longer look upon marriage as sacred and pure once they realize that, in most cases, this purity is a lot of nonsense. As far as I'm concerned, it's not wrong for a man to bring a little experience to a marriage. After all, it has nothing to do with the marriage itself, does it?

Soon after I turned eleven, they told me about menstruation. But even then, I had no idea where the blood came from or what it was for. When I was twelve and a half, I learned some more from Jacque, who wasn't as ignorant as I was. My own intuition told me what a man and a woman do when they're together; it seemed like a crazy idea at first, but when Jacque confirmed it, I was proud of myself for having figured it out!

It was also Jacque who told me that children didn't come out of their mother's tummies. As she put it, "Where the ingredients go in is where the finished product comes out!" Jacque and I found out about the hymen, and quite a few other details, from a book on sex education. I also knew that you could keep from having children, but how that worked inside your body remained a mystery. When I came here, Father told me about prostitutes, etc., but all in all there are still unanswered questions.

If mothers don't tell their children everything, they hear it in bits and pieces, and that can't be right.

Even though it's Saturday, I'm not bored! That's because I've been up in the attic with Peter. I sat there dreaming with my eyes closed, and it was wonderful.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

SUNDAY, MARCH 19, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Yesterday was a very important day for me. After lunch everything was as usual. At five I put on the potatoes, and Mother gave me some blood sausage to take to Peter. I didn't want to at first, but I finally went. He wouldn't accept the sausage, and I had the dreadful feel- ing it was still because of that argument we'd had about distrust. Suddenly I couldn't bear it a moment longer and my eyes filled with tears. Without another word, I re- turned the platter to Mother and went to the bathroom to have a good cry. Afterward I decided to talk things out with Peter. Before dinner the four of us were helping him with a crossword puzzle, so I couldn't say anything. But as we were sitting down to eat, I whispered to him, "Are you going to practice your shorthand tonight, Peter?"

"No," was his reply.

"I'd like to talk to you later on."

He agreed.

After the dishes were done, I went to his room and asked if he'd refused the sausage because of our last quar- rel. Luckily, that wasn't the reason; he just thought it was bad manners to seem so eager. It had been very hot downstairs and my face was as red as a lobster. So after taking down some water for Margot, I went back up to get a little fresh air. For the sake of appearances, I first went and stood beside the van Daans' window before going to Peter's room. He was standing on the left side of the open window, so I went over to the right side. It's much easier to talk next to an open window in semidarkness than in broad daylight, and I think Peter felt the same way. We told each other so much, so very much, that I can't repeat it all. But it felt good; it was the most won- derful evening I've ever had in the Annex. I'll give you a brief description of the various subjects we touched on.

First we talked about the quarrels and how I see them in a very different light these days, and then about how we've become alienated from our parents. I told Peter about Mother and Father and Margot and myself. At one point he asked, "You always give each other a good-night kiss, don't you?"

"One? Dozens of them. You don't, do you?"

"No, I've never really kissed anyone."

"Not even on your birthday?"

"Yeah, on my birthday I have."

We talked about how neither of us really trusts our parents, and how his parents love each other a great deal and wish he'd confide in them, but that he doesn't want to. How I cry my heart out in bed and he goes up to the loft and swears. How Margot and I have only recently gotten to know each other and yet still tell each other very little, since we're always together. We talked about every imaginable thing, about trust, feelings and ourselves. Oh, Kitty, he was just as I thought he would be.

Then we talked about the year 1942, and how different we were back then; we don't even recognize ourselves from that period. How we couldn't stand each other at first. He'd thought I was a noisy pest, and I'd quickly concluded that he was nothing special. I didn't understand why he didn't flirt with me, but now I'm glad. He also mentioned how he often used to retreat to his room. I said that my noise and exuberance and his silence were two sides of the same coin, and that I also liked peace and quiet but don't have anything for myself alone, except my diary, and that everyone would rather see the back of me, starting with Mr. Dussel, and that I don't always want to sit with my parents. We discussed how glad he is that my parents have children and how glad I am that he's here.

How I now understand his need to withdraw and his relationship to his parents, and how much I'd like to help him when they argue.

"But you're always a help to me!" he said.

"How?" I asked, greatly surprised.

"By being cheerful."

That was the nicest thing he said all evening. He also told me that he didn't mind my coming to his room the way he used to; in fact, he liked it. I also told him that all of Father's and Mother's pet names were meaningless, that a kiss here and there didn't automatically lead to trust. We also talked about doing things your own way, the diary, loneliness, the difference between everyone's inner and outer selves, my mask, etc.

It was wonderful. He must have come to love me as a friend, and, for the time being, that's enough. I'm so grateful and happy, I can't find the words. I must apolo- gize, Kitty, since my style is not up to my usual standard today. I've just written whatever came into my head!

I have the feeling that Peter and I share a secret. Whenever he looks at me with those eyes, with that smile and that wink, it's as if a light goes on inside me. I hope things will stay like this and that we'll have many, many more happy hours together.

Your grateful and happy Anne

MONDAY, MARCH 20, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

This morning Peter asked me if I'd come again one evening. He swore I wouldn't be disturbing him, and said that where there was room for one, there was room for two. I said I couldn't see him every evening, since my parents didn't think it was a good idea, but he thought I shouldn't let that bother me. So I told him I'd like to come some Saturday evening and also asked him if he'd let me know when you could see the moon.

"Sure," he said, "maybe we can go downstairs and look at the moon from there." I agreed; I'm not really so scared of burglars.

In the meantime, a shadow has fallen on my happiness. For a long time I've had the feeling that Margot likes Peter. Just how much I don't know, but the whole situation is very unpleasant. Now every time I go see Peter I'm hurting her, without meaning to. The funny thing is that she hardly lets it show. I know I'd be insanely jealous, but Margot just says I shouldn't feel sorry for her.

"I think it's so awful that you've become the odd one out," I added.

"I'm used to that," she replied, somewhat bitterly.

I don't dare tell Peter. Maybe later on, but he and I need to discuss so many other things first.

Mother slapped me last night, which I deserved. I mustn't carry my indifference and contempt for her too far. In spite of everything, I should try once again to be friendly and keep my remarks to myself!

Even Pim isn't as nice as he used to be. He's been trying not to treat me like a child, but now he's much too cold. We'll just have to see what comes of it! He's warned me that if I don't do my algebra, I won't get any tutoring after the war. I could simply wait and see what happens, but I'd like to start again, provided I get a new book.

That's enough for now. I do nothing but gaze at Peter, and I'm filled to overflowing!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

Evidence of Margot's goodness. I received this today, March 20, 1944:

Anne, yesterday when I said I wasn't jeal- ous of you, I wasn't being entirely honest. The situation is this: I'm not jealous of either you or Peter. I'm just sorry I haven't found anyone willi whom to share my thoughts and feelings, and I'm not likely to in the near future. But that's why I wish, from the bottom of my heart, that you will both be able to place your trust in each other. You're already missing out on so much here, things other people take for granted.

On the other hand, I'm certain I'd never have gotten as far with Peter, because I think I'd need to feel very close to a person before I could share my thoughts. I'd want to have the feeling that he understood me through and through, even if I didn't say much. For this reason it would have to be someone I felt was intellectually superior to me, and that isn't the case with Peter. But I can imagine your feeling close to him.

So there's no need for you to reproach yourself because you think you' te taking something I was entitled to; nothing could be further from the truth. You and Peter have everything to gain by your friendship.

My answer:

Dearest Margot,

Your letter was extremely kind, but I still don't feel completely happy about the situation, and I don't think I ever will.

At the moment, Peter and I don't trust each other as much as you seem to think. It's just that when you're standing beside an open window at twthght, you can say more to each other than in bright sunshine. It's also easier to whisper your feelings than to shout them from the rooftops. I think you've begun to feel a kind of sisterly affection for Peter and would like to help him, just as much as I would. Perhaps you'll be able to do that someday, though that's not the kind of trust we have in mind. I believe that trust has to corne from both sides; I also think that's the reason why Father and I have never really grown so close. But let's not talk about it anymore. If there's anything you still want to discuss, please write, because it's easier for me to say what I mean as on paper than face-to-face. You know how le much I admire you, and only hope that some of your goodness and Father's goodness will rub off on me, because, in that sense, you two are a lot alike.

Yours, Anne 

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 22,1944

Dearest Kitty,

I received this letter last night from Margot:

Dear Anne,

After your letter of yesterday I have the unpleasant feeling that your conscience bothers you whenever you go to Peter's to work or talk; there's really no reason for that. In my heart, I know there's someone who deserves t my trust (as I do his), and I wouldn't be able to tolerate Peter in his place.

However, as you wrote, I do think of Peter as a kind of brother. . . a younger brother; we've been sending out feelers, and a brotherly and sisterly affection mayor may not develop at some later date, but it's certainly not reached that stage yet. So there's no need for you to feel sorry for me. Now that you've found companionship, enjoy it as much as you can.

In the meantime, things are getting more and more wonderful here. I think, Kitty, that true love may be developing in the Annex. All those jokes about marrying Peter if we stayed here long enough weren't so silly after all. Not that I'm thinking of marrying him, mind you. I don't even know what he'll be like when he grows up. Or if we'll even love each other enough to get married.

I'm sure now that Peter loves me too; I just don't know in what way. I can't figure out if he wants only a good friend, or if he's attracted to me as a girl or as a sister. When he said I always helped him when his parents were arguing, I was tremendously happy; it was one step toward making me believe in his friendship. I asked him yesterday what he'd do if there were a dozen Annes who kept popping in to see him. His answer was: "If they were all like you, it wouldn't be so bad." He's extremely hospitable, and I think he really likes to see me. Mean- while, he's been working hard at learning French, even studying in bed until ten-fifteen.

Oh, when I think back to Saturday night, to our words, our voices, I feel satisfied with myself for the very first time; what I mean is, I'd still say the same and wouldn't want to change a thing, the way I usually do. He's so handsome, whether he's smthng or just sitting still. He's so sweet and good and beautiful. I think what surprised him most about me was when he discovered that I'm not at all the superficial, worldly Anne I appear to be, but a dreamer, like he is, with just as many troubles!

Last night after the dinner dishes, I waited for him to ask me to stay upstairs. But nothing happened; I went away. He came downstairs to tell Dussel it was time to listen to the radio and hung around the bathroom for a while, but when Dussel took too long, he went back upstairs. He paced up and down his room and went to bed early.

The entire evening I was so restless I kept going to the bathroom to splash cold water on my face. I read a bit, daydreamed some more, looked at the clock and waited, waited, waited, all the while listening to his foot- steps. I went to bed early, exhausted.

Tonight I have to take a bath, and tomorrow?

Tomorrow's so far away!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

My answer:

Dearest Margot,

I think the best thing is simply to wait and see what happens. It can't be much longer before Peter and I will have to decide whether to go back to the way we were or do some- thing else. I don't know how it'll turn out; I can't see any farther than the end of my nose.

But I'm certain of one thing: if Peter and I do become friends, I'm going to tell him you're also very fond of him and are prepared to help him if he needs you. You wouldn't want me to, I'm sure, but I don't care; I don't know what Peter thinks of you, but I'll ask him when the time comes. It's certainly nothing bad -- on the contrary! You're welcome to join us in the attic, or wherever we are. You won't be disturbing us, because we have an unspoken agreement to talk only in the evenings when it's dark.

Keep your spirits up! I'm doing my best, though it's not always easy. Your time may come sooner than you think.

Yours, Anne

THURSDAY, MARCH 23, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Things are more or less back to normal here. Our coupon men have been released from prison, thank goodness!

Miep's been back since yesterday, but today it was her husband's turn to take to his bed-chills and fever, the usual flu symptoms. Bep is better, though she still has a cough, and Mr. Kleiman will have to stay home for a long time.

Yesterday a plane crashed nearby. The crew was able to parachute out in time. It crashed on top of a school, but luckily there were no children inside. There was a small fire and a couple of people were killed. As the airmen made their descent, the Germans sprayed them with bullets. The Amsterdammers who saw it seethed with rage at such a dastardly deed. We-by which I mean the ladies-were also scared out of our wits. Brrr, I hate the sound of gunfire.

Now about myself.

I was with Peter yesterday and, somehow, I honestly don't know how, we wound up talking about sex. I'd made up my mind a long time ago to ask him a few things. He knows everything; when I said that Margot and I weren't very well informed, he was amazed. I told him a lot about Margot and me and Mother and Father and said that lately I didn't dare ask them anything. He offered to enlighten me, and I gratefully accepted: he described how contraceptives work, and I asked him very boldly how boys could tell they were grown up. He had to think about that one; he said he'd tell me tonight. I told him what had happened to Jacque, and said that girls are defenseless against strong boys. "Well, you don't have to be afraid of me," he said.

When I came back that evening, he told me how it is with boys. Slightly embarrassing, but still awfully nice to be able to discuss it with him. Neither he nor I had ever imagined we'd be able to talk so openly to a girl or a boy, respectively, about such intimate matters. I think I know everything now. He told me a lot about what he called Prasentivmitteln* [* Should be Praservativmitteln: prophylactics] in German.

That night in the bathroom Margot and I were talking about Bram and Trees, two friends of hers.

This morning I was in for a nasty surprise: after breakfast Peter beckoned me upstairs. "That was a dirty trick you played on me," he said. "I heard what you and Margot were saying in the bathroom last night. I think you just wanted to find out how much Peter knew and then have a good laugh!"

I was stunned! I did everything I could to talk him out of that outrageous idea; I could understand how he must have felt, but it just wasn't true!

"Oh no, Peter," I said. "I'd never be so mean. I told you I wouldn't pass on anything you said to me and I won't. To put on an act like that and then deliberately be so mean. . . No,Peter, that's not my idea ofa joke.

It wouldn't be fair. I didn't say anything, honest. Won't you believe me?" He assured me he did, but I think we'll have to talk about it again sometime. I've done nothing all day but worry about it. Thank goodness he came right out and said what was on his mind. Imagine if he'd gone around thinking I could be that mean. He's so sweet!

Now I'll have to tell him everything!

Yours, Anne

FRIDAY, MARCH 24, 1944

Dear Kitty,

I often go up to Peter's room after dinner nowadays to breathe in the fresh evening air. You can get around to meaningful conversations more quickly in the dark than with the sun tickling your face. It's cozy and snug sitting beside him on a chair and looking outside. The van Daans and Dussel make the silliest remarks when I disappear into his room. "Annes zweite Heimat,"* [* Anne's second home] they say, or "Is it proper for a gentleman to receive young girls in his room at night with the lights out?" Peter has amazing presence of mind in the face of these so-called witticisms. My mother, incidentally, is also bursting with curiosity and simply dying to ask what we talk about, only she's secretly afraid I'd refuse to answer. Peter says the grown-ups are just jealous because we're young and that we shouldn't take their obnoxious comments to heart.

Sometimes he comes downstairs to get me, but that's awkward too, because in spite of all his precautions his face turns bright red and he can hardly get the words out of his mouth. I'm glad I don't blush; it must be extremely unpleasant.

Besides, it bothers me that Margot has to sit downstairs all by herself, while I'm upstairs enjoying Peter's company. But what can I do about it? I wouldn't mind it if she came, but she'd just be the odd one out, sitting there like a lump on a log.

I've had to listen to countless remarks about our sudden friendship. I can't tell you how often the conversation at meals has been about an Annex wedding, should the war last another five years. Do we take any notice of this parental chitchat? Hardly, since it's all so silly. Have my parents forgotten that they were young once? Apparently they have. At any rate, they laugh at us when we're serious, and they're serious when we're joking.

I don't know what's going to happen next, or whether we'll run out of things to say. But if it goes on like this, we'll eventually be able to be together without talking. If only his parents would stop acting so strangely. It's probably because they don't like seeing me so often; Peter and I certainly never tell them what we talk about. Imagine if they knew we were discussing such intimate things.

I'd like to ask Peter whether he knows what girls look like down there. I don't think boys are as complicated as girls. You can easily see what boys look like in photographs or pictures of male nudes, but with women it's different. In women, the genitals, or whatever they're called, are hidden between their legs. Peter has probably never seen a girl up close. To tell you the truth, neither have I. Boys are a lot easier. How on earth would I go about describing a girl's parts? I can tell from what he said that he doesn't know exactly how it all fits together. He was talking about the "Muttermund," [* cervix], but that's on the inside, where you can't see it. Everything's pretty well arranged in us women. Until I was eleven or twelve, I didn't realize there was a second set of labia on the inside, since you couldn't see them. What's even funnier is that I thought urine came out of the clitoris. I asked Mother one time what that little bump was, and she said she didn't know. She can really play dumb when she wants to!

But to get back to the subject. How on earth can you explain what it all looks like without any models?

Shall I try anyway? Okay, here goes!

When you're standing up, all you see from the front is hair. Between your legs there are two soft, cushiony things, also covered with hair, which press together when you're standing, so you can't see what's inside. They separate when you sit down, and they're very red and quite fleshy on the inside. In the upper part, between the outer labia, there's a fold of skin that, on second thought, looks like a kind of blister. That's the clitoris. Then come the inner labia, which are also pressed together in a kind of crease. When they open up, you can see a fleshy little mound, no bigger than the top of my thumb. The upper part has a couple of small holes in it, which is where the urine comes out. The lower part looks as if it were just skin, and yet that's where the vagina is. You can barely find it, because the folds of skin hide the opening. The hole's so small I can hardly imagine how a man could get in there, much less how a baby could come out. It's hard enough trying to get your index finger inside. That's all there is, and yet it plays such an important role!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

SATURDAY, MARCH 25, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

You never realize how much you've changed until after it's happened. I've changed quite drastically, everything about me is different: my opinions, ideas, critical outlook. Inwardly, outwardly, nothing's the same. And, I might safely add, since it's true, I've changed for the better. I once told you that, after years of being adored, it was hard for me to adjust to the harsh reality of grown-ups and rebukes. But Father and Mother are largely to blame for my having to put up with so much. At home they wanted me to enjoy life, which was fine, but here they shouldn't have encouraged me to agree with them and only shown me "their" side of all the quarrels and gossip. It was a long time before I discovered the score was fifty-fifty. I now know that many blunders have been committed here, by young and old alike. Father and Mother's biggest mistake in dealing with the van Daans is that they're never candid and friendly (admittedly, the friendliness might have to be feigned). Above all, I want to keep the peace, and to neither quarrel nor gossip. With Father and Margot that's not difficult, but it is with Mother, which is why I'm glad she gives me an occasional rap on the knuckles. You can win Mr. van Daan to your side by agreeing with him, listening quietly, not saying much and most of all . . . responding to his teasing and his corny jokes with a joke of your own. Mrs. van D. can be won over by talking openly to her and admitting when you're wrong. She also frankly admits her faults, of which she has many. I know all too well that she doesn't think as badly of me as she did in the beginning. And that's simply because I'm honest and tell people right to their faces what I think, even when it's not very flattering. I want to be honest; I think it gets you further and also makes you feel better about yourself.

Yesterday Mrs. van D. was talking about the rice we gave Mr. Kleiman. "All we do is give, give, give. But at a certain point I think that enough is enough. If he'd only take the trouble, Mr. Kleiman could scrounge up his own rice. Why should we give away all our supplies? We need them just as badly."

"No, Mrs. van Daan," I replied. "I don't agree with you. Mr. Kleiman may very well be able to get hold of a little rice, but he doesn't like having to worry about it. It's not our place to criticize the people who are helping us. We should give them whatever they need if we can possibly spare it. One less plate of rice a week won't make that much difference; we can always eat beans."

Mrs. van D. didn't see it my way, but she added that, even though she disagreed, she was willing to back down, and that was an entirely different matter.

Well, I've said enough. Sometimes I know what my place is and sometimes I have my doubts, but I'll eventually get where I want to be! I know I will! Especially now that I have help, since Peter helps me through many a rough patch and rainy day!

I honestly don't know how much he loves me and whether we'll ever get as far as a kiss; in any case, I don't want to force the issue! I told Father I often go see Peter and asked if he approved, and of course he did!

It's much easier now to tell Peter things I'd nor- mally keep to myself; for example, I told him I want to write later on, and if I can't be a writer, to write in addition to my work.

I don't have much in the way of money or worldly possessions, I'm not beautiful, intelligent or clever, but I'm happy, and I intend to stay that way! I was born happy, I love people, I have a trusting nature, and I'd like everyone else to be happy too.

Your devoted friend, Anne M. Frank

An empty day, though clear and bright,
Is just as dark as any night.

(I wrote this a few weeks ago and it no longer holds true, but I included it because my poems are so few and far between.)

MONDAY, MARCH 27, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

At least one long chapter on our life in hiding should be about politics, but I've been avoiding the subject, since it interests me so little. Today, however, I'll devote an entire letter to politics.

Of course, there are many different opinions on this topic, and it's not surprising to hear it frequently discussed in times of war, but. . . arguing so much about politics is just plain stupid! Let them laugh, swear, make bets, grumble and do whatever they want as long as they stew in their own juice. But don't let them argue, since that only makes things worse. The people who come from outside bring us a lot of news that later proves to be untrue; however, up to now our radio has never lied. Jan, Miep, Mr. Kleiman, Bep and Mr. Kugler go up and down in their political moods, though Jan least of all.

Here in the Annex the mood never varies. The end- less debates over the invasion, air raids, speeches, etc., etc., are accompanied by countless exclamations such as "Eempossible!, Urn Gottes Willen* [* Oh, for heaven's sake]. If they're just getting started now, how long is it going to last!, It's going splendidly, But, great!"

Optimists and pessimists -- not to mention the realists -- air their opinions with unflagging energy, and as with everything else, they're all certain that they have a monopoly on the truth. It annoys a certain lady that her spouse has such supreme faith in the British, and a certain husband attacks his wife because of her teasing and dispar- aging remarks about his beloved nation!

And so it goes from early in the morning to late at night; the funny part is that they never get tired of it. I've discovered a trick, and the effect is overwhelming, just like pricking someone with a pin and watching them jump. Here's how it works: I start talking about politics.

All it takes is a single question, a word or a sentence, and before you know it, the entire family is involved! 

As if the German "Wehrmacht News" and the English BBC weren't enough, they've now added special air-raid announcements. In a word, splendid. But the other side of the coin is that the British Air Force is operating around the clock. Not unlike the German propaganda machine, which is cranking out lies twenty-four hours a day!

So the radio is switched on every morning at eight (if not earlier) and is listened to every hour until nine, ten or even eleven at night. This is the best evidence yet that the adults have infinite patience, but also that their brains have turned to mush (some of them, I mean, since I wouldn't want to insult anyone). One broadcast, two at the most, should be enough to last the entire day. But no, those old nincompoops. . . never mind, I've already said it all! "Music While You Work," the Dutch broadcast from England, Frank Phillips or Queen Wilhelmina, they each get a turn and fInd a willing listener. If the adults aren't eating or sleeping, they're clustered around the radio talking about eating, sleeping and politics. Whew! It's getting to be a bore, and it's all I can do to keep from turning into a dreary old crone myself! Though with all the old folks around me, that might not be such a bad idea!

Here's a shining example, a speech made by our beloved Winston Churchill.

Nine o'clock, Sunday evening. The teapot, under its cozy, is on the table, and the guests enter the room.

Dussel sits to the left of the radio, Mr. van D. in front of it and Peter to the side. Mother is next to Mr. van D., willi Mrs. van  D. behind them. Margot and I are sitting in the last row and Pim at the table. I realize this isn't a very clear description of our seating arrangements, but it doesn't matter. The men smoke, Peter's eyes close from the strain of listening, Mama is dressed in her long, dark negligee, Mrs. van D. is trembling because of the planes, which take no notice of the speech but fly blithely on toward Essen, Father is slurping his tea, and Margot and I are united in a sisterly way by the sleeping Mouschi, who has taken possession of both our knees. Margot's hair is in curlers and my nightgown is too small, too tight and too short. It all looks so intimate, cozy and peaceful, and for once it really is. Yet I await the end of the speech willi dread. They're impatient, straining at the leash to start another argument! Pst, pst, like a cat luring a mouse from its hole, they goad each other into quarrels and dissent.

Yours, Anne

TUESDAY, MARCH 28, 1944

My dearest Kitty,

As much as I'd like to write more on politics, I have lots of other news to report today. First, Mother has virtually forbidden me to go up to Peter's, since, according to her, Mrs. van Daan is jealous. Second, Peter's invited Margot to join us upstairs. Whether he really means it or is just saying it out of politeness, I don't know. Third, I asked Father if he thought I should take any notice of Mrs. van Daan's jealousy and he said I didn't have to.

What should I do now? Mother's angry, doesn't want me going upstairs, wants me to go back to doing my homework in the room I share willi Dussel. She may be jealous herself. Father doesn't begrudge us those few hours and thinks it's nice we get along so well. Margot likes Peter too, but feels that three people can't talk about the same things as two.

Furthermore, Mother thinks Peter's in love with me. To tell you the truth, I wish he were. Then we'd be even, and it'd be a lot easier to get to know each other. She also claims he's always looking at me. Well, I suppose we do give each other the occasional wink. But I can't help it if he keeps admiring my dimples, can I?

I'm in a very difficult position. Mother's against me and I'm against her. Father turns a blind eye to the silent struggle between Mother and me. Mother is sad, because she still loves me, but I'm not at all unhappy, because she no longer means anything to me.

As for Peter. . . I don't want to give him up. He's so sweet and I admire him so much. He and I could have a really beautiful relationship, so why are the old folks poking their noses into our business again? Fortu- nately, I'm used to hiding my feelings, so I manage not to show how crazy I am about him. Is he ever going to say anything? Am I ever going to feel his cheek against mine, the way I felt Petel's cheek in my dream? Oh, Peter and

Petel, you're one and the same! They don't understand us; they'd never understand that we're content just to sit beside each other and not say a word. They have no idea of what draws us together! Oh, when will we overcome all these difficulties? And yet it's good that we have to surmount them, since it makes the end that much more beautiful. When he lays his head on his arms and closes his eyes, he's still a child; when he plays with Mouschi or talks about her, he's loving; when he carries the potatoes or other heavy loads, he's strong; when he goes to watch the gunfire or walks through the dark house to look for burglars, he's brave; and when he's so awkward and clumsy, he's hopelessly endearing. It's much nicer when he explains something to me than when I have to teach him. I wish he were superior to me in nearly every way!

What do we care about our two mothers? Oh, if only he'd say something.

Father always says I'm conceited, but I'm not, I'm merely vain! I haven't had many people tell me I was pretty, except for a boy at school who said I looked so cute when I smiled. Yesterday Peter paid me a true com- pliment, and just for fun I'll give you a rough idea of our conversation.

Peter often says, "Smile!" I thought it was strange, so yesterday I asked him, "Why do you always want me to smile?"

"Because you get dimples in your cheeks. How do you do that?"

"I was born with them. There's also one in my chin. It's the only mark of beauty I possess."

"No, no, that's not true!"

"Yes it is. I know I'm not beautiful. I never have been and I never will be!"

"I don't agree. I think you're pretty."

"I am not."

"I say you are, and you'll have to take my word for it." So of course I then said the same about him.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 29, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Mr. Bolkestein, the Cabinet Minister, speaking on the Dutch broadcast from London, said that after the war a collection would be made of diaries and letters dealing with the war. Of course, everyone pounced on my diary. Just imagine how interesting it would be if I were to publish a novel about the Secret Annex. The title alone would make people think it was a detective story.

Seriously, though, ten years after the war people would find it very amusing to read how we lived, what we ate and what we talked about as Jews in hiding. Although I tell you a great deal about our lives, you still know very little about us. How frightened the women are during air raids; last Sunday, for instance, when 350 British planes dropped 550 tons of bombs on IJmuiden, so that the houses trembled like blades of grass in the wind. Or how many epidemics are raging here.

You know nothing of these matters, and it would take me all day to describe everything down to the last detail. People have to stand in line to buy vegetables and all kinds of goods; doctors can't visit their patients, since their cars and bikes are stolen the moment they turn their backs; burglaries and thefts are so common that you ask yourself what's suddenly gotten into the Dutch to make them so light-fingered. Little children, eight- and eleven- year-olds, smash the windows of people's homes and steal whatever they can lay their hands on. People don't dare leave the house for even five minutes, since they're liable to come back and find all their belongings gone. Every day the newspapers are filled with reward notices for the return of stolen typewriters, Persian rugs, electric clocks, fabrics, etc. The electric clocks on street corners are dismantled, public phones are stripped down to the last wire.

Morale among the Dutch can't be good. Everyone's hungry; except for the ersatz coffee, a week's food ration doesn't last two days. The invasion's long in coming, the men are being shipped off to Germany, the children are sick or undernourished, everyone's wearing worn-out clothes and run-down shoes. A new sole costs 7.50 guil- ders on the black market. Besides, few shoemakers will do repairs, or if they do, you have to wait four months for your shoes, which might very well have disappeared in the meantime.

One good thing has come out of this: as the food gets worse and the decrees more severe, the acts of sabo- tage against the authorities are increasing. The ration board, the police, the officials-they're all either helping their fellow citizens or denouncing them and sending them off to prison. Fortunately, only a small percentage of Dutch people are on the wrong side.

Yours, Anne

FRIDAY, MARCH 31, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Just imagine, it's still fairly cold, and yet most people have been without coal for nearly a month. Sounds awful, doesn't it? There's a general mood of optimism about the Russian front, because that's going great guns! I don't often write about the political situation, but I must tell you where the Russians are at the moment. They've reached the Polish border and the Prut River in Romania. They're close to Odessa, and they've surrounded Ternopol. Every night we're expecting an extra communique from Stalin.

They're firing off so many salutes in Moscow, the city must be rumbling and shaking all day long. Whether they like to pretend the fighting's nearby or they simply don't have any other way to express their joy, I don't know!

Hungary has been occupied by German troops.

There are still a million Jews living there; they too are doomed.

Nothing special is happening here. Today is Mr. van Daan's birthday. He received two packets of tobacco, one serving of coffee, which his wife had managed to save, lemon punch from Mr. Kugler, sardines from Miep, eau de cologne from us, lilacs, tulips and, last but not least, a cake with raspberry filling, slightly gluey because of the poor quality of the flour and the lack of butter, but deli- cious anyway.

All that talk about Peter and me has died down a bit. He's coming to pick me up tonight. Pretty nice of him, don't you think, since he hates doing it! We're very good friends. We spend a lot of time together and talk about every imaginable subject. It's so nice not having to hold back when we come to a delicate topic, the way I would with other boys. For example, we were talking about blood and somehow the conversation turned to menstruation, etc. He thinks we women are quite tough to be able to withstand the loss of blood, and that I am too. I wonder why?

My life here has gotten better, much better. God has not forsaken me, and He never will.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

SATURDAY, APRIL 1, 1944

My dearest Kitty,

And yet everything is still so difficult. You do know what I mean, don't you? I long so much for him to kiss me, but that kiss is taking its own sweet time. Does he still think of me as a friend? Don't I mean anything more?

You and I both know that I'm strong, that I can carry most burdens alone. I've never been used to sharing my worries with anyone, and I've never clung to a mother, but I'd love to lay my head on his shoulder and just sit there quietly.

I can't, I simply can't forget that dream of Peter's cheek, when everything was so good! Does he have the same longing? Is he just too shy to say he loves me? Why does he want me near him so much? Oh, why doesn't he say something?

I've got to stop, I've got to be calm. I'll try to be strong again, and if I'm patient, the rest will follow. But -- and this is the worst part -- I seem to be chasing him. I'm always the one who has to go upstairs; he never comes to me. But that's because of the rooms, and he understands why I object. Oh, I'm sure he understands more than I think .

Yours, Anne M. Frank

MONDAY, APRIL 3, 1944

My dearest Kitty,

Contrary to my usual practice, I'm going to write you a detailed description of the food situation, since it's become a matter of some difficulty and importance, not only here in the Annex, but in all of Holland, all of Europe and even beyond.

In the twenty-one months we've lived here, we've been through a good many "food cycles" -- you'll understand what that means in a moment. A "food cycle" is a period in which we have only one particular dish or type of vegetable to eat. For a long time we ate nothing but endive. Endive with sand, endive without sand, endive with mashed potatoes, endive-and-mashed potato casserole. Then it was spinach, followed by kohlrabi, salsify, cucumbers, tomatoes, sauerkraut, etc., etc.

It's not much fun when you have to eat, say, sauer- kraut every day for lunch and dinner, but when you're hungry enough, you do a lot of things. Now, however, we're going through the most delightful period so far, because there are no vegetables at all.

Our weekly lunch menu consists of brown beans, split-pea soup, potatoes with dumplings, potato kugel and, by the grace of God, turnip greens or rotten carrots, and then it's back to brown beans. Because of the bread shortage, we eat potatoes at every meal, starting with breakfast, but then we fry them a little. To make soup we use brown beans, navy beans, potatoes, packages of vege- table soup, packages of chicken soup and packages of bean soup. There are brown beans in everything, including the bread. For dinner we always have potatoes with imitation gravy and -- thank goodness we've still got it -- beet salad. I must tell you about the dumplings. We make them with government-issue flour, water and yeast. They're so gluey and tough that it feels as if you had rocks in your stomach, but oh well!

The high point is our weekly slice of liverwurst, and the jam on our unbuttered bread. But we're still alive, and much of the time it still tastes good too!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 5, 1944

My dearest Kitty,

For a long time now I didn't know why I was bothering to do any schoolwork. The end of the war still seemed so far away, so unreal, like a fairy tale. If the war isn't over by September, I won't go back to school, since I don't want to be two years behind.

Peter filled my days, nothing but Peter, dreams and thoughts until Saturday night, when I felt so utterly miserable; oh, it was awful. I held back my tears when I was with Peter, laughed uproariously with the van Daans as we drank lemon punch and was cheerful and excited, but the minute I was alone I knew I was going to cry my eyes out. I slid to the floor in my nightgown and began by saying my prayers, very fervently. Then I drew my knees to my chest, lay my head on my arms and cried, all huddled up on the bare floor. A loud sob brought me back down to earth, and I choked back my tears, since I didn't want anyone next door to hear me. Then I tried to pull myself together, saying over and over, "I must, I must, I must. . . " Stiff from sitting in such an unusual position, I fell back against the side of the bed and kept up my struggle until just before ten-thirty, when I climbed back into bed. It was over!

And now it's really over. I finally realized that I must do my schoolwork to keep from being ignorant, to get on in life, to become a journalist, because that's what I want! I know I can write. A few of my stories are good, my descriptions of the Secret Annex are humorous, much of my diary is vivid and alive, but. . . it remains to be seen whether I really have talent.

"Eva's Dream" is my best fairy tale, and the odd thing is that I don't have the faintest idea where it came from. Parts of "Cady's Life" are also good, but as a whole it's nothing special. I'm my best and harshest critic. I know what's good and what isn't. Unless you write yourself, you can't know how wonderful it is; I always used to bemoan the fact that I couldn't draw, but now I'm overjoyed that at least I can write. And if I don't have the talent to write books or newspaper articles, I can always write for myself. But I want to achieve more than that. I can't imagine having to live like Mother, Mrs. van Daan and all the women who go about their work and are then forgotten. I need to have something besides a husband and children to devote myself to! I don't want to have lived in vain like most people. I want to be useful or bring enjoyment to all people, even those I've never met. I want to go on living even after my death! And that's why I'm so grateful to God for having given me this gift, which I can use to develop myself and to express all that's inside me!

When I write I can shake off all my cares. My sor- row disappears, my spirits are revived! But, and that's a big question, will I ever be able to write something great, will I ever become a journalist or a writer?

I hope so, oh, I hope so very much, because writing allows me to record everything, all my thoughts, ideals and fantasies.

I haven't worked on "Cady's Life" for ages. In my mind I've worked out exactly what happens next, but the story doesn't seem to be coming along very well. I might never finish it, and it'll wind up in the wastepaper basket or the stove. That's a horrible thought, but then I say to myself, "At the age of fourteen and with so little experience, you can't write about philosophy."

So onward and upward, with renewed spirits. It'll all work out, because I'm determined to write!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

THURSDAY, APRIL 6, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

You asked me what my hobbies and interests are and I'd like to answer, but I'd better warn you, I have lots of them, so don't be surprised.

First of all: writing, but I don't really think of that as a hobby.

Number two: genealogical charts. I'm looking in every newspaper, book and document I can find for the family trees of the French, German, Spanish, English, Austrian, Russian, Norwegian and Dutch royal famthes. I've made great progress with many of them, because for ! a long time I've been taking notes while reading biogra- I, phies or history books. I even copy out many of the passages on history. 

So my third hobby is history, and Father's already bought me numerous books. I can hardly wait for the day when I'll be able to go to the public library and ferret out Iii the information I need. 

Number four is Greek and Roman mythology. I have various books on this subject too. I can name the nine Muses and the seven loves of Zeus. I have the wives of Hercules, etc., etc., down pat. 

My other hobbies are movie stars and family photographs. I'm crazy about reading and books. I adore the history of the arts, especially when it concerns writers, poets and painters; musicians may come later. I loathe algebra, geometry and arithmetic. I enjoy all my other school subjects, but history's my favorite! 

Yours, Anne M. Frank 

TUESDAY, APRIL 11, 1944 

My dearest Kitty, 

My head's in a whirl, I really don't know where to begin. Thursday (the last time I wrote you) everything  was as usual. Friday afternoon (Good Friday) we played Monopoly; Saturday afternoon too. The days passed very quickly. Around two o'clock on Saturday, heavy firing ii began-machine guns, according to the men. For the rest, everything was quiet. 

Sunday afternoon Peter came to see me at four-thirty, at my invitation. At five-fifteen we went to the Ii front attic, where we stayed until six. There was a beautil ful Mozart concert on the radio from six to seven-fifteen; I especially enjoyed the Kleine Nachtmusik. I can hardly bear to listen in the kitchen, since beautiful music stirs me to the very depths of my soul. Sunday evening Peter couldn't take his balli, because the washtub was down in the office kitchen, filled with laundry. The two of us went to the front attic together, and in order to be able to sit comfortably, I took along the only cushion I could find in my room. We seated ourselves on a packing crate. Since both the crate and the cushion were very narrow, we were sitting quite close, leaning against two other crates; Mouschi kept us company, so we weren't without a chaperon. Suddenly, at a quarter to nine, Mr. van Daan whistled and asked if we had Mr. Dussel's cushion. We jumped up and went downstairs willi the cushion, the cat and Mr. van Daan. This cushion was the source of much misery. Dussel was angry because I'd taken the one he uses as a pillow, and he was afraid it might be covered with fleas; he had the entire house in an uproar because of this one cushion. In revenge, Peter and I stuck two hard brushes in his bed, but had to take them out again when Dussel unexpectedly decided to go sit in his room. We had a really good laugh at this little intermezzo.

But our fun was short-lived. At nine-thirty Peter knocked gently on the door and asked Father to come upstairs and help him with a difficult English sentence.

"That sounds fishy," I said to Margot. "It's obviously a pretext. You can tell by the way the men are talking that there's been a break-in!" I was right. The warehouse was being broken into at that very moment. Father, Mr. van Daan and Peter were downstairs in a flash. Margot, Mother, Mrs. van D. and I waited. Four frightened women need to talk, so that's what we did until we heard a bang downstairs. After that all was quiet. The clock struck quarter to ten. The color had drained from our faces, but we remained calm, even though we were afraid. Where were the men? What was that bang? Were they fighting with the burglars? We were too scared to think; all we could do was wait.

Ten o'clock, footsteps on the stairs. Father, pale and nervous, came inside, followed by Mr. van Daan. "Lights out, tiptoe upstairs, we're expecting the police!" There wasn't time to be scared. The lights were switched off, I grabbed a jacket, and we sat down upstairs. 

"What happened? Tell us quickly!"

There was no one to tell us; the men had gone back downstairs. The four of them didn't come back up until ten past ten. Two of them kept watch at Peter's open window. The door to the landing was locked, the book- case shut. We draped a sweater over our night-light, and then they told us what had happened:

Peter was on the landing when he heard two loud bangs. He went downstairs and saw that a large panel was missing from the left half of the warehouse door. He dashed upstairs, alerted the "Home Guard," and the four of them went downstairs. When they entered the warehouse, the burglars were going about their business. Without thinking, Mr. van Daan yelled "Police!" Hur- ried footsteps outside; the burglars had fled. The board was put back in the door so the police wouldn't notice the gap, but then a swift kick from outside sent it flying to the floor. The men were amazed at the burglars' audacity. Both Peter and Mr. van Daan felt a murderous rage come over them. Mr. van Daan slammed an ax against the floor, and all was quiet again. Once more the panel was re- placed, and once more the attempt was foiled. Outside, a man and a woman shone a glaring flashlight through the opening, lighting up the entire warehouse. "What the . . ." mumbled one of the men, but now their roles had been reversed. Instead of policemen, they were now burglars. All four of them raced upstairs. Dussel and Mr. van Daan snatched up Dussel's books, Peter opened the doors and windows in the kitchen and private office, hurled the phone to the ground, and the four of them finally ended up behind the bookcase.

END OF PART ONE

In all probability the man and woman with the flashlight had alerted the police. It was Sunday night, Easter Sunday. The next day, Easter Monday, the office was going to be closed, which meant we wouldn't be able to move around until Tuesday morning. Think of it, having to sit in such terror for a day and two nights! We thought of nothing, but simply sat there in pitch darkness -- in her fear, Mrs. van D. had switched off the lamp. We whispered, and every time we heard a creak, someone said, "Shh, shh."

It was ten-thirty, then eleven. Not a sound. Father and Mr. van Daan took turns coming upstairs to us. Then, at eleven-fifteen, a noise below. Up above you could hear the whole family breathing. For the rest, no one moved a muscle. Footsteps in the house, the private office, the kitchen, then. . . on the staircase. All sounds of breathing stopped, eight hearts pounded. Foot- steps on the stairs, then a rattling at the bookcase. This moment is indescribable. 

"Now we're done for," I said, and I had visions of all fifteen of us being dragged away by the Gestapo that very night. 

More rattling at the bookcase, twice. Then we heard a can fall, and the footsteps receded. We were out of danger, so far! A shiver went though everyone's body, I heard several sets of teeth chattering, no one said a word. We stayed like this until eleven-thirty.

There were no more sounds in the house, but a light was shining on our landing, right in front of the bookcase. Was that because the police thought it looked so suspicious or because they simply forgot? Was anyone going to come back and turn it off? We found our tongues again.

There were no longer any people inside the building, but perhaps someone was standing guard outside. We then did three things: tried to guess what was going on, trembled with fear and went to the bathroom. Since the buckets were in the attic, all we had was Peter's metal wastepaper basket. Mr. van Daan went first, then Father, but Mother was too embarrassed. Father brought the waste- basket to the next room, where Margot, Mrs. van Daan and I gratefully made use of it. Mother finally gave in. There was a great demand for paper, and luckily I had some in my pocket.

The wastebasket stank, everything went on in a whisper, and we were exhausted. It was midnight.

"Lie down on the floor and go to sleep!" Margot and I were each given a pillow and a blanket. Margot lay down near the food cupboard, and I made my bed between the table legs. The smell wasn't quite so bad when you were lying on the floor, but Mrs. van Daan quietly went and got some powdered bleach and draped a dish towel over the potty as a further precaution.

Talk, whispers, fear, stench, farting and people continually going to the bathroom; try sleeping through that! By two-thirty, however, I was so tired I dozed off and didn't hear a thing until three-thirty. I woke up when Mrs. van D. lay her head on my feet.

"For heaven's sake, give me something to put on!" I said. I was handed some clothes, but don't ask what: a pair of wool slacks over my pajamas, a red sweater and a black skirt, white understockings and tattered kneesocks.

Mrs. van D. sat back down on the chair, and Mr. van D. lay down with his head on my feet. From three- thirty onward I was engrossed in thought, and still shiver- ing so much that Mr. van Daan couldn't sleep. I was preparing myself for the return of the police. We'd tell them we were in hiding; if they were good people, we'd be safe, and if they were Nazi sympathizers, we could try to bribe them!

"We should hide the radio!" moaned Mrs. van D.

"Sure, in the stove," answered Mr. van D. "If they find us, they might as well find the radio!"

"Then they'll also find Anne's diary," added Father.

"So burn it," suggested the most terrified of the group.

This and the police rattling on the bookcase were the moments when I was most afraid. Oh, not my diary; if my diary goes, I go too! Thank goodness Father didn't say anything more.

There's no point in recounting all the conversations; so much was said. I comforted Mrs. van Daan, who was very frightened. We talked about escaping, being interrogated by the Gestapo, phoning Mr. Kleiman and being courageous.

"We must behave like soldiers, Mrs. van Daan. If our time has come, well then, it'll be for Queen and Country, for freedom, truth and justice, as they're always telling us on the radio. The only bad thing is that we'll drag the others down with us!"

After an hour Mr. van Daan switched places with his wife again, and Father came and sat beside me. The men smoked one cigarette after another, an occasional sigh was heard, somebody made another trip to the potty, and then everything began allover again.

Four o'clock, five, five-thirty. I went and sat with Peter by his window and listened, so close we could feel each other's bodies trembling; we spoke a word or two from time to time and listened intently. Next door they took down the blackout screen. They made a list of everything they were planning to tell Mr. Kleiman over the phone, because they intended to call him at seven and ask him to send someone over. They were taking a big chance, since the police guard at the door or in the warehouse might hear them calling, but there was an even greater risk that the police would return.

I'm enclosing their list, but for the sake of clarity, I'll copy it here.

Buralary: Police in building, up to bookcase, but no farther. Burglars apparently interrupted, forced warehouse door, fled through garden. Main entrance bolted; Kugler must have left through second door.

Typewriter and adding machine safe in black chest in private office.

Miep's or Bep's laundry in washtub in kitchen.

Only Bep or Kugler have key to second door; lock may be broken.

Try to warn jan and get key, look around office; also feed cat.

For the rest, everything went according to plan. Mr. Kleiman was phoned, the poles were removed from the doors, the typewriter was put back in the chest. Then we all sat around the table again and waited for either jan or the police.

Peter had dropped off to sleep and Mr. van Daan ANNE FRANK and I were lying on the floor when we heard loud footsteps below. I got up quietly. "It's Jan!"

"No, no, it's the police!" they all said.

There was a knocking at our bookcase. Miep whis- tled. This was too much for Mrs. van Daan, who sank limply in her chair, white as a sheet. If the tension had lasted another minute, she would have fainted.

Jan and Miep came in and were met with a delightful scene. The table alone would have been worth a photograph: a copy of Cinema &.. Theater, opened to a page of dancing girls and smeared with jam and pectin, which we'd been taking to combat the diarrhea, two jam jars, half a bread roll, a quarter of a bread roll, pectin, a mirror, a comb, matches, ashes, cigarettes, tobacco, an ashtray, books, a pair of underpants, a flashlight, Mrs. van Daan's comb, toilet paper, etc.

Jan and Miep were of course greeted with shouts and tears. Jan nailed a pinewood board over the gap in the door and went off again with Miep to inform the police of the break-in. Miep had also found a note under the ware- house door from Sleegers, the night watchman, who had noticed the hole and alerted the police. Jan was also planning to see Sleegers.

So we had half an hour in which to put the house and ourselves to rights. I've never seen such a transformation as in those thirty minutes. Margot and I got the beds ready downstairs, went to the bathroom, brushed our teeth, washed our hands and combed our hair. Then I straightened up the room a bit and went back upstairs. The table had already been cleared, so we got some water, made coffee and tea, boiled the milk and set the table. Father and Peter emptied our improvised potties and rinsed them with warm water and powdered bleach. The largest one was filled to the brim and was so heavy they had a hard time lifting it. To make things worse, it was leaking, so they had to put it in a bucket.

At eleven o'clock Jan was back and joined us at the table, and gradually everyone began to relax. Jan had the following story to tell:

Mr. Sleegers was asleep, but his wife told Jan that her husband had discovered the hole in the door while making his rounds. He called in a policeman, and the two of them searched the building. Mr. Sleegers, in his capacity as night watchman, patrols the area every night on his bike, accompanied by his two dogs. His wife said he would come on Tuesday and tell Mr. Kugler the rest. No one at the police station seemed to know anything about the break-in, but they made a note to come first thing Tuesday morning to have a look.

On the way back Jan happened to run into Mr. van Hoeven, the man who supplies us with potatoes, and told him of the break-in. "I know," Mr. van Hoeven calmly replied. "Last night when my wife and I were walking past your building, I saw a gap in the door. My wife wanted to walk on, but I peeked inside with a flashlight, and that's when the burglars must have run off. To be on the safe side, I didn't call the police. I thought it wouldn't be wise in your case. I don't know anything, but I have my suspicions." Jan thanked him and went on. Mr. van Hoeven obviously suspects we're here, because he always delivers the potatoes at lunchtime. A decent man!

It was one o'clock by the time Jan left and we'd done the dishes. All eight of us went to bed. I woke up at quarter to three and saw that Mr. Dussel was already up. My face rumpled with sleep, I happened to run into Peter in the bathroom, just after he'd come downstairs. We agreed to meet in the office. I freshened up a bit and went down.

"After all this, do you still dare go to the front attic?" he asked. I nodded, grabbed my pillow, with a cloth wrapped around it, and we went up together. The weather was gorgeous, and even though the air-raid sirens soon began to wail, we stayed where we were. Peter put his arm around my shoulder, I put mine around his, and we sat quietly like this until four o'clock, when Margot came to get us for coffee.

We ate our bread, drank our lemonade and joked (we were finally able to again), and for the rest everything was back to normal. That evening I thanked Peter because he'd been the bravest of us all.

None of us have ever been in such danger as we were that night. God was truly watching over us. Just think-the police were right at the bookcase, the light was on, and still no one had discovered our hiding place! "Now we're done for!" I'd whispered at that moment, but once again we were spared. When the invasion comes and the bombs start falling, it'll be every man for himself, but this time we feared for those good, innocent Christians who are helping us.

"We've been saved, keep on saving us!" That's all we can say.

This incident has brought about a whole lot of changes. As of now, Dussel will be doing his work in the bathroom, and Peter will be patrolling the house between eight-thirty and nine-thirty. Peter isn't allowed to open his window anymore, since one of the Keg people noticed it was open. We can no longer flush the toilet after nine-thirty at night. Mr. Sleegers has been hired as night watchman, and tonight a carpenter from the underground is coming to make a barricade out of our white Frankfurt bedsteads. Debates are going on left and right in the Annex. Mr. Kugler has reproached us for our carelessness. Jan also said we should never go downstairs. What we have to do now is find out whether Sleegers can be trusted, whether the dogs will bark if they hear someone behind the door, how to make the barricade, all sorts of things.

We've been strongly reminded of the fact that we're Jews in chains, chained to one spot, without any rights, but with a thousand obligations. We must put our feelings aside; we must be brave and strong, bear discomfort with- out complaint, do whatever is in our power and trust in God. One day this terrible war will be over. The time will come when we'll be people again and not just Jews!

Who has inflicted this on us? Who has set us apart from all the rest? Who has put us through such suffering? It's God who has made us the way we are, but it's also God who will lift us up again. In the eyes of the world, we're doomed, but if, after all this suffering, there are still Jews left, the Jewish people will be held up as an example. Who knows, maybe our religion will teach the world and all the people in it about goodness, and that's the reason, the only reason, we have to suffer. We can never be just Dutch, or just English, or whatever, we will always be Jews as well. And we'll have to keep on being Jews, but then, we'll want to be.

Be brave! Let's remember our duty and perform it without complaint. There will be a way out. God has never deserted our people. Through the ages Jews have had to suffer, but through the ages they've gone on living, and the centuries of suffering have only made them stronger. The weak shall fall and the strong shall survive and not be defeated!

That night I really thought I was going to die. I waited for the police and I was ready for death, like a soldier on a battlefield. I'd gladly have given my life for my country. But now, now that I've been spared, my first wish after the war is to become a Dutch citizen. I love the Dutch, I love this country, I love the language, and I want to work here. And even if I have to write to the Queen herself, I won't give up until I've reached my goal!

I'm becoming more and more independent of my parents. Young as I am, I face life with more courage and have a better and truer sense of justice than Mother. I know what I want, I have a goal, I have opinions, a religion and love. If only I can be myself, I'll be satisfied. I know that I'm a woman, a woman with inner strength and a great deal of courage!

If God lets me live, I'll achieve more than Mother ever did, I'll make my voice heard, I'll go out into the world and work for mankind!

I now know that courage and happiness are needed first!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

FRIDAY, APRIL 14, 1944

Dear Kitty,

Everyone here is still very tense. Pim has nearly reached the bothng point; Mrs. van D. is lying in bed with a cold, grumbling; Mr. van D. is growing pale without his cigarettes; Dussel, who's having to give up many of his comforts, is carping at everyone; etc., etc. We seem to have run out of luck lately. The toilet's leaking, and the faucet's stuck. Thanks to our many connections, we'll soon be able to get these repaired.

I'm occasionally sentimental, as you know, but from time to time I have reason to be: when Peter and I are sitting close together on a hard wooden crate among the junk and dust, our arms around each other's shoulders, Peter toying with a lock of my hair; when the birds outside are trilling their songs, when the trees are in bud, when the sun beckons and the sky is so blue--oh, that's when I wish for so much!

All I see around me are dissatisfied and grumpy faces, all I hear are sighs and stifled complaints. You'd think our lives had taken a sudden turn for the worse. Honestly, things are only as bad as you make them. Here in the Annex no one even bothers to set a good example. We each have to figure out how to get the better of our own moods!

Every day you hear, "If only it were all over!"

Work, love, courage and hope,
Make me good and help me cope!

I really believe, Kit, that I'm a little nutty today, and I don't know why. My writing's all mixed up, I'm jump- ing from one thing to another, and sometimes I seriously doubt whether anyone will ever be interested in this drivel. They'll probably call it "The Musings of an Ugly Duckling." My diaries certainly won't be of much use to Mr. Bolkestein or Mr. Gerbrandy.* [* Gerrit Bolkestein was the Minister of Education and Pieter Gerbrandy was the Prime Minister of the Dutch government in exile in London. See Anne's letter of March 29, 1944.]

Yours, Anne M. Frank

SATURDAY, APRIL 15, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

"There's just one bad thing after another. When will it all end?" You can sure say that again. Guess what's happened now? Peter forgot to unbolt the front door. As a result, Mr. Kugler and the warehouse employees couldn't get in. He went to Keg's, smashed in our office kitchen window and got in that way. The windows in the Annex were open, and the Keg people saw that too. What must they be thinking? And van Maaren? Mr. Kugler's furious. We accuse him of not doing anything to reinforce the doors, and then we do a stupid thing like this! Peter's extremely upset. At the table, Mother said she felt more sorry for Peter than for anyone else, and he nearly began to cry. We're equally to blame, since we usually ask him every day if he's unbolted the door, and so does Mr. van Daan. Maybe I can go comfort him later on. I want to help him so much!

Here are the latest news bulletins about life in the Secret Annex over the last few weeks:

A week ago Saturday, Boche suddenly got sick. He sat quite still and started drooling. Miep immediately picked him up, rolled him in a towel, tucked him in her shopping bag and brought him to the dog-and-cat clinic. Boche had some kind of intestinal problem, so the vet gave him medicine. Peter gave it to him a few times, but Boche soon made himself scarce. I'll bet he was out courting his sweetheart. But now his nose is swollen and he meows whenever you pick him up-he was probably trying to steal food and somebody smacked him. Mouschi lost her voice for a few days. Just when we decided she had to be taken to the vet too, she started getting better.

We now leave the attic window open a crack every night. Peter and I often sit up there in the evening.

Thanks to rubber cement and oil paint, our toilet ; could quickly be repaired. The broken faucet has been replaced. 

Luckily, Mr. Kleiman is feeling better. He's going to see a specialist soon. We can only hope he won't need an operation. 

This month we received eight Tation books. Unfortunately, for the next two weeks beans have been substituted for oatmeal or groats. Our latest delicacy is piccalilli. If you're out of luck, all you get is a jar full of cucumber and mustard sauce. 

Vegetables are hard to come by. There's only lettuce, lettuce and more lettuce. Our meals consist entirely of potatoes and imitation gravy. 

The Russians are in possession of more than half the Crimea. The British aren't advancing beyond Cassino. We'll have to count on the Western Wall. There have been a lot of unbelievably heavy air raids. The Registry of Births, Deaths and Marriages in The Hague was bombed. All Dutch people will be issued new ration registration cards.

Enough for today. 

Yours, Anne M. Frank

SUNDAY, APRIL 16, 1944

My dearest Kitty,

Remember yesterday's date, since it was a red-letter day for me. Isn't it an important day for every girl when she gets her first kiss? Well then, it's no less important to me. The time Bram kissed me on my right cheek or Mr. Woudstra on my right hand doesn't count. How did I suddenly come by this kiss? I'll tell you.

Last night at eight I was sitting with Peter on his divan and it wasn't long before he put an arm around me. (Since it was Saturday, he wasn't wearing his overalls.)"Why don t we move over a little," I said, "so won t keep bumping my head against the cupboard."

He moved so far over he was practically in the corner. I slipped my arm under his and across his back, and he put his arm around my shoulder, so that I was nearly engulfed by him. We've sat like this on other occasions, but never so close as we were last night. He held me firmly against him, my left side against his chest; my heart had already begun to beat faster, but there was more to come. He wasn't satisfied until my head lay on his shoulder, with his on top of mine. I sat up again after about five minutes, but before long he took my head in his hands and put it back next to his. Oh, it was so wonderful. I could hardly talk, my pleasure was too intense; he caressed my cheek and arm, a bit clumsily, and played with my hair. Most of the time our heads were touching.

I can't tell you, Kitty, the feeling that ran through me. I was too happy for words, and I think he was too.

At nine-thirty we stood up. Peter put on his tennis shoes so he wouldn't make much noise on his nightly round of the building, and I was standing next to him. How I suddenly made the right movement, I don't know, but before we went downstairs, he gave me a. kiss, through my hair, half on my left cheek and half on my ear. I tore downstairs without looking back, and I long so much for today.

Sunday morning, just before eleven.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

MONDAY, APRIL 17, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Do you think Father and Mother would approve of a girl my age sitting on a divan and kissing a seventeen-and- a-half-year-old boy? I doubt they would, but I have to trust my own judgment in this matter. It's so peaceful and safe, lying in his arms and dreaming, it's so thrilling to feel his cheek against mine, it's so wonderful to know there's someone waiting for me. But, and there is a but, will Peter want to leave it at that? I haven't forgotten his promise, but. . . he is a boy!

I know I'm starting at a very young age. Not even fifteen and already so independent -- that's a little hard for other people to understand. I'm pretty sure Margot would never kiss a boy unless there was some talk of an engagement or marriage. Neither Peter nor I has any such plans. I'm also sure that Mother never touched a man before she met Father. What would my girlfriends or Jacque say if they knew I'd lain in Peter's arms with my heart against his chest, my head on his shoulder and his head and face against mine!

Oh, Anne, how terribly shocking! But seriously, I don't think it's at all shocking; we're cooped up here, cut off from the world, anxious and fearful, especially lately. Why should we stay apart when we love each other? Why shouldn't we kiss each other in times like these? Why should we wait until we've reached a suitable age? Why should we ask anybody's permission?

I've decided to look out for my own interests. He'd never want to hurt me or make me unhappy. Why shouldn't I do what my heart tells me and makes both of us happy?

Yet I have a feeling, Kitty, that you can sense my doubt. It must be my honesty rising in revolt against all this sneaking around. Do you think it's my duty to tell Father what I'm up to? Do you think our secret should be shared with a third person? Much of the beauty would be lost, but would it make me feel better inside? I'll bring it up with him.

Oh, yes, I still have so much I want to discuss with him, since I don't see the point of just cuddling. Sharing our thoughts with each other requires a great deal of trust, but we'll both be stronger because of it!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

P.S. We were up at six yesterday morning, because the whole family heard the sounds of a break-in again. It must have been one of our neighbors who was the victim this time. When we checked at seven o'clock, our doors were still shut tight, thank goodness!

TUESDAY, APRIL 18,1944

Dearest Kitty,

Everything's fine here. Last night the carpenter came again to put some sheets of iron over the door panels. Father just got through saying he definitely expects large-scale operations in Russia and Italy, as well as in the West, before May 20; the longer the war lasts, the harder it is to imagine being liberated from this place.

Yesterday Peter and I finally got around to having the talk we've been postponing for the last ten days. I told him all about girls, without hesitating to discuss the most intimate matters. I found it rather amusing that he thought the opening in a woman's body was simply left out of illustrations. He couldn't imagine that it was actually located between a woman's legs. The evening ended with a mutual kiss, near the mouth. It's really a lovely feeling!

I might take my "favorite quotes notebook" up with me sometime so Peter and I can go more deeply into matters. I don't think lying in each other's arms day in and day out is very satisfying, and I hope he feels the same.

After our mild winter we've been having a beautiful spring. April is glorious, not too hot and not too cold, with occasional light showers. Our chestnut tree is in leaf, and here and there you can already see a few small blossoms.

Bep presented us Saturday with four bouquets of flowers: three bouquets of daffodils, and one bouquet of grape hyacinths for me. Mr. Kugler is supplying us with more and more newspapers.

It's time to do my algebra, Kitty. Bye.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 19, 1944

Dearest Darling,

(That's the title of a movie with Dorit Kreysler, Ida Wust and Harald Paulsen!)

What could be nicer than sitting before an open window, enjoying nature, listening to the birds sing, feeling the sun on your cheeks and holding a darling boy in your arms? I feel so peaceful and safe with his arm around me, knowing he's near and yet not having to speak; how can this be bad when it does me so much good? Oh, if only we were never disturbed again, not even by Mouschi.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

FRIDAY, APRIL 21,1944

My dearest Kitty,

I stayed in bed yesterday with a sore throat, but since I was already bored the very first afternoon and didn't have a fever, I got up today. My sore throat has nearly "verschwunden"* [* disappeared]. 

Yesterday, as you've probably already discovered, was our Fiihrer's fifty-fifth birthday. Today is the eighteenth birthday of Her Royal Highness Princess Elizabeth of York. The BBC reported that she hasn't yet been declared of age, though royal children usually are. We've been wondering which prince they'll marry this beauty off to, but can't think of a suitable candidate; perhaps her sister, Princess Margaret Rose, can have Crown Prince Baudouin of Belgium!

Here we've been going from one disaster to the next. No sooner have the outside doors been reinforced than van Maaren rears his head again. In all likelihood he's the one who stole the potato flour, and now he's trying to pin the blame on Bep. Not surprisingly, the Annex is once again in an uproar. Bep is beside herself with rage. Perhaps Mr. Kugler will finally have this shady character tailed.

The appraiser from Beethovenstraat was here this morning. He offered us 400 guilders for our chest; in our opinion, the other estimates are also too low.

I want to ask the magazine The Prince if they'll take one of my fairy tales, under a pseudonym, of course. But up to now all my fairy tales have been too long, so I don't think I have much of a chance.

Until the next time, darling.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

TUESDAY, APRIL 25, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

For the last ten days Dussel hasn't been on speaking terms with Mr. van Daan, and all because of the new security measures since the break-in. One of these was that he's no longer allowed to go downstairs in the evenings. Peter and Mr. van Daan make the last round every night at nine-thirty, and after that no one may go downstairs. We can't flush the toilet anymore after eight at night or after eight in the morning. The windows may be opened only in the morning when the lights go on in Mr. Kugler's office, and they can no longer be propped open with a stick at night. This last measure is the reason for Dussel's sulking. He claims that Mr. van Daan bawled him out, but he has only himself to blame. He says he'd rather live without food than without air, and that they simply must figure out a way to keep the windows open.

"I'll have to speak to Mr. Kugler about this," he said to me.

I replied that we never discussed matters of this sort with Mr. Kugler, only within the group.

"Everything's always happening behind my back. I'll have to talk to your father about that."

He's also not allowed to sit in Mr. Kugler's office anymore on Saturday afternoons or Sundays, because the manager of Keg's might hear him if he happens to be next door. Dussel promptly went and sat there anyway. Mr. van Daan was furious, and Father went downstairs to talk to Dussel, who came up with some flimsy excuse, but even Father didn't fall for it this time. Now Father's keep- ing his dealings with Dussel to a minimum because Dussel insulted him. Not one of us knows what he said, but it must have been pretty awful.

And to think that that miserable man has his birthday next week. How can you celebrate your birthday when you've got the sulks, how can you accept gifts from people you won't even talk to? 

Mr. Voskuijl is going downhill rapidly. For more than ten days he's had a temperature of almost a hundred and four. The doctor said his condition is hopeless; they think the cancer has spread to his lungs. The poor man, we'd so like to help him, but only God can help him now!

I've written an amusing story called "Blurry the Explorer," which was a big hit with my three listeners.

I still have a bad cold and have passed it on to Margot, as well as Mother and Father. If only Peter doesn't get it. He insisted on a kiss, and called me his El Dorado. You can't call a person that, silly boy! But he's sweet anyway!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

THURSDAY, APRIL 27, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Mrs. van D. was in a bad mood this morning. All she did was complain, first about her cold, not being able to get cough drops and the agony of having to blow her nose all the time. Next she grumbled that the sun wasn't shining, the invasion hadn't started, we weren't allowed to look out the windows, etc., etc. We couldn't help but laugh at her, and it couldn't have been that bad, since she soon joined in.

Our recipe for potato kugel, modified due to lack of onions:

Put peeled potatoes through a food mill and add a little dry government-issue flour and salt. Grease a mold or ovenproof dish with paraffin or stearin and bake for 21/2 hours. Serve with rotten strawberry compote. (Onions not available. Nor oil for mold or dough!)

At the moment I'm reading Emperor Charles V, written by a professor at the University of Gottingen; he's spent forty years working on this book. It took me five days to read fifty pages. I can't do any more than that. Since the book has 598 pages, you can figure out just how long it's going to take me. And that's not even counting the second volume. But. . . very interesting!

The things a schoolgirl has to do in the course of a single day! Take me, for example. First, I translated a passage on Nelson's last battle from Dutch into English. Then, I read more about the Northern War (1700-21) involving Peter the Great, Charles XII, Augustus the Strong, Stanislaus Leczinsky, Mazeppa, von Gorz, Bran- denburg, Western Pomerania, Eastern Pomerania and Denmark, plus the usual dates. Next, I wound up in Brazil, where I read about Bahia tobacco, the abundance of coffee, the one and a half million inhabitants of Rio de Janeiro, Pernambuco and Sao Paulo and, last but not least, the Amazon River. Then about Negroes, mulattoes, mestizos, whites, the illiteracy rate -- over 50 percent -- and malaria. Since I had some time left, I glanced through a genealogical chart: John the Old, William Louis, Ernest Casimir I, Henry Casimir I, right up to little Margriet Franciska (born in 1943 in Ottawa).

Twelve o'clock: I resumed my studies in the attic, reading about deans, priests, ministers, popes and . . . whew, it was one o'clock!

At two the poor child (ho hum) was back at work. Old World and New World monkeys were next. Kitty, tell me quickly, how many toes does a hippopotamus have?

Then came the Bible, Noah's Ark, Shem, Ham and Japheth. After that, Charles V. Then, with Peter, Thack- eray's book about the colonel, in English. A French test, and then a comparison between the Mississippi and the Missouri!

Enough for today. Adieu!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

FRIDAY, APRIL 28, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

I've never forgotten my dream of Peter Schiff (see the beginning of January). Even now I can still feel his cheek against mine, and that wonderful glow that made up for all the rest. Once in a while I'd had the same feeling with this Peter, but never so intensely. . . until last night. We were sitting on the divan, as usual, in each other's arms. Suddenly the everyday Anne slipped away and the second Anne took her place. The second Anne, who's never overconfident or amusing, but wants only to love and be gentle.

I sat pressed against him and felt a wave of emotion come over me. Tears rushed to my eyes; those from the left fell on his overalls, while those from the right trickled down my nose and into the air and landed beside the first. Did he notice? He made no movement to show that he had. Did he feel the same way I did? He hardly said a word. Did he realize he had two Annes at his side? My questions went unanswered.

At eight-thirty I stood up and went to the window, where we always say good-bye. I was still trembling, I was still Anne number two. He came over to me, and I threw my arms around his neck and kissed him on his left cheek. I was about to kiss the other cheek when my mouth met his, and we pressed our lips together. In a daze, we embraced, over and over again, never to stop, oh!

Peter needs tenderness. For the first time in his life he's discovered a girl; for the first time he's seen that even the biggest pests also have an inner self and a heart, and are transformed as soon as they're alone with you. For the first time in his life he's given himself and his friendship to another person. He's never had a friend before, boy or girl. Now we've found each other. I, for that matter, didn't know him either, had never had someone I could confide in, and it's led to this . . .

The same question keeps nagging me: "Is it right?" Is it right for me to yield so soon, for me to be so passionate, to be filled with as much passion and desire as Peter? Can I, a girl, allow myself to go that far?

There's only one possible answer: "I'm longing so much. . . and have for such a long time. I'm so lonely and now I've found comfort!"

In the mornings we act normally, in the afternoons too, except now and then. But in the evenings the suppressed longing of the entire day, the happiness and the bliss of all the times before come rushing to the surface, and all we can think about is each other. Every night, after our last kiss, I feel like running away and never looking him in the eyes again. Away, far away into the darkness and alone!

And what awaits me at the bottom of those fourteen stairs? Bright lights, questions and laughter. I have to act normally and hope they don't notice anything.

My heart is still too tender to be able to recover so quickly from a shock like the one I had last night. The gentle Anne makes infrequent appearances, and she's not about to let herself be shoved out the door so soon after she's arrived. Peter's reached a part of me that no one has ever reached before, except in my dream! He's taken hold of me and turned me inside out. Doesn't everyone need a little quiet time to put themselves to rights again? Oh, Peter, what have you done to me? What do you want from me?

Where will this lead? Oh, now I understand Bep. Now, now that I'm going through it myself, I understand her doubts; if I were older and he wanted to marry me, what would my answer be? Anne, be honest! You wouldn't be able to marry him. But it's so hard to let go. Peter still has too little character, too little willpower, too little courage and strength. He's still a child, emotionally no older than I am; all he wants is happiness and peace of mind. Am I really only fourteen? Am I really just a silly schoolgirl? Am I really so inexperienced in everything? I have more experience than most; I've experienced something almost no one my age ever has.

I'm afraid of myself, afraid my longing is making me yield too soon. How can it ever go right with other boys later on? Oh, it's so hard, the eternal struggle between heart and mind. There's a time and a place for both, but how can I be sure that I've chosen the right time?

Yours, Anne M. Frank

TUESDAY, MAY 2, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Saturday night I asked Peter whether he thinks I should tell Father about us. After we'd discussed it, he said he thought I should. I was glad; it shows he's sensible, and sensitive. As soon as I came downstairs, I went with Father to get some water. While we were on the stairs, I said, "Father, I'm sure you've gathered that when Peter and I are together, we don't exactly sit at opposite ends of the room. Do you think that's wrong?"

Father paused before answering: "No, I don't think it's wrong. But Anne, when you're living so close together, as we do, you have to be careful." He said some other words to that effect, and then we went upstairs.

Sunday morning he called me to him and said, "Anne, I've been thinking about what you said." (Oh, oh, I knew what was coming!) "Here in the Annex it's not such a good idea. I thought you were just friends. Is Peter in love with you?"

"Of course not," I answered.

"Well, you know I understand both of you. But you must be the one to show restraint; don't go upstairs so often, don't encourage him more than you can help. In matters like these, it's always the man who takes the active role, and it's up to the woman to set the limits. Outside, where you're free, things are quite different. You see other boys and girls, you can go outdoors, take part in sports and all kinds of activities. But here, if you're together too much and want to get away, you can't. You see each other every hour of the day-all the time, in fact. Be careful, Anne, and don't take it too seriously! 

"I don't, Father, but Peter's a decent boy, a nice boy."

"Yes, but he doesn't have much strength of character. He can easily be influenced to do good, but also to do bad. I hope for his sake that he stays good, because he's basically a good person."

We talked some more and agreed that Father would speak to him too.

Sunday afternoon when we were in the front attic, Peter asked, "Have you talked to your Father yet, Anne?"

"Yes," I replied, "I'll tell you all about it. He doesn't think it's wrong, but he says that here, where we're in such close quarters, it could lead to conflicts."

"We've already agreed not to quarrel, and I plan to keep my promise."

"Me too, Peter. But Father didn't think we were serious, he thought we were just friends. Do you think we still can be?"

"Yes, I do. How about you?"

"Me too. I also told Father that I trust you. I do trust you, Peter, just as much as I do Father. And I think you're worthy of my trust. You are, aren't you?"

"I hope so." (He was very shy, and blushing.)

"I believe in you, Peter," I continued. "I believe you have a good character and that you'll get ahead in this world."

After that we talked about other things. Later I said, "If we ever get out of here, I know you won't give me another thought."

He got all fired up. "That's not true, Anne. Oh no, I won't let you even think that about me!"

Just then somebody called us.

Father did talk to him, he told me Monday. "Your Father thought our friendship might turn into love," he said. "But I told him we'd keep ourselves under control."

Father wants me to stop going upstairs so often, but I don't want to. Not just because I like being with Peter, but because I've said I trust him. I do trust him, and I want to prove it to him, but I'll never be able to if I stay downstairs out of distrust.

No, I'm going!

In the meantime, the Dussel drama has been resolved. Saturday evening at dinner he apologized in beautiful Dutch. Mr. van Daan was immediately reconciled. Dussel must have spent all day practicing his speech.

Sunday, his birthday, passed without incident. We gave him a bottle of good wine from 1919, the van Daans (who can now give their gift after all) presented him with a jar of piccalilli and a package of razor blades, and Mr. Kugler gave him a jar of lemon syrup (to make lemonade), Miep a book, Little Martin, and Bep a plant. He treated everyone to an egg.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

WEDNESDAY, MAY 3, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

First the weekly news! We're having a vacation from politics. There's nothing, and I mean absolutely nothing, to report. I'm also gradually starting to believe that the invasion will come. After all, they can't let the Russians do all the dirty work; actually, the Russians aren't doing anything at the moment either.

Mr. Kleiman comes to the office every morning now. He got a new set of springs for Peter's divan, so Peter will have to get to work reupholstering it; Not surprisingly, he isn't at all in the mood. Mr. Kleiman also brought some flea powder for the cats.

Have I told you that our Boche has disappeared? We haven't seen hide nor hair of her since last Thursday. She's probably already in cat heaven, while some animal lover has turned her into a tasty dish. Perhaps some girl who can afford it will be wearing a cap made of Boche's fur. Peter is heartbroken.

For the last two weeks we've been eating lunch at eleven-thirty on Saturdays; in the mornings we have to make do with a cup of hot cereal. Starting tomorrow it'll be like this every day; that saves us a meal. Vegetables are still very hard to come by. This afternoon we had rotten boiled lettuce. Ordinary lettuce, spinach and boiled let- tuce, that's all there is. Add to that rotten potatoes, and you have a meal fit for a king!

I hadn't had my period for more than two months, but it finally started last Sunday. Despite the mess and bother, I'm glad it hasn't deserted me.

As you can no doubt imagine, we often say in despair, "What's the point of the war? Why, oh, why can't people live together peacefully? Why all this destruction?"

The question is understandable, but up to now no one has come up with a satisfactory answer. Why is England manufacturing bigger and better airplanes and bombs and at the same time churning out new houses for reconstruction? Why are millions spent on the war each day, while not a penny is available for medical science, artists or the poor? Why do people have to starve when mountains of food are rotting away in other parts of the world? Oh, why are people so crazy?

I don't believe the war is simply the work of politicians and capitalists. Oh no, the common man is every bit as guilty; otherwise, people and nations would have re- belled long ago! There's a destructive urge in people, the urge to rage, murder and kill. And until all of humanity, without exception, undergoes a metamorphosis, wars will continue to be waged, and everything that has been carefully built up, cultivated and grown will be cut down and destroyed, only to start allover again!

I've often been down in the dumps, but never desperate. I look upon our life in hiding as an interesting adventure, full of danger and romance, and every privation as an amusing addition to my diary. I've made up my mind to lead a different life from other girls, and not to become an ordinary housewife later on. What I'm experiencing here is a good beginning to an interesting life, and that's the reason -- the only reason -- why I have to laugh at the humorous side of the most dangerous moments.

I'm young and have many hidden qualities; I'm young and strong and living through a big adventure; I'm right in the middle of it and can't spend all day complaining because it's impossible to have any fun! I'm blessed with many things: happiness, a cheerful disposition and strength. Every day I feel myself maturing, I feel liberation drawing near, I feel the beauty of nature and the goodness of the people around me. Every day I think what a fascinating and amusing adventure this is! With all that, why should I despair?

Yours, Anne M. Frank

FRIDAY, MAY 5, 1944

Dear Kitty,

Father's unhappy with me. After our talk on Sunday he thought I'd stop going upstairs every evening. He won't have any of that "Knutscherej"* [* Necking] going on. I can't stand that word. Talking about it was bad enough -- why does he have to make me feel bad too! I'll have a word with him today. Margot gave me some good advice.

Here's more or less what I'd like to say:

I think you expect an explanation from me, Father, so I'll give you one. You're disap- pointed in me, you expected more restraint from me, you no doubt want me to act the way a fourteen-year-old is supposed to. But that's where you're wrong!

Since we've been here, from July 1942 until a few weeks ago, I haven't had an easy time. If only you knew how much I used to cry at night, how unhappy and despondent I was, how lonely I felt, you'd understand my wanting to go upstairs! I've now reached the point where I don't need the support of Mother or anyone else. It didn't happen overnight. I've struggled long and hard and shed many tears to become as independent as I am now. You can laugh and refuse to believe me, but I don't care. I know I'm an independent person, and I don't feel I need to account to you for my actions. I'm only telling you this because I don't want you to think I'm doing things behind your back. But there's only one person I'm accountable to, and that's me.

When I was having problems, everyone -- and that includes you -- closed their eyes and ears and didn't help me. On the contrary, all I ever got were admonitions not to be so noisy. I was noisy only to keep myself from being miserable all the time. I was overconfident to keep from having to listen to the voice inside me. I've been putting on an act for the last year and a half, day in, day out. I've never complained or dropped my mask, nothing of the kind, and now. . . now the battle is over. I've won! I'm independent, in both body and mind. I don't need a mother anymore, and I've emerged from the struggle a stronger person.

Now that it's over, now that I know the battle has been won, I want to go my own way, to follow the path that seems right to me. Don't think of me as a fourteen-year-old, since all these troubles have made me older; I won't regret my actions, I'll behave the way I think I should!

Gentle persuasion won't keep me from going upstairs. You'll either have to forbid it, or trust me through thick and thin. Whatever you do, just leave me alone!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

SATURDAY, MAY 6, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Last night before dinner I tucked the letter I'd written into Father's pocket. According to Margot, he read it and was upset for the rest of the evening. (I was upstairs doing the dishes!) Poor Pim, I might have known what the effect of such an epistle would be. He's so sensitive! I immediately told Peter not to ask any questions or say anything more. Pim's said nothing else to me about the matter. Is he going to?

Everything here is more or less back to normal. We can hardly believe what Jan, Mr. Kugler and Mr. Kleiman tell us about the prices and the people on the outside; half a pound of tea costs 350.00 guilders, half a pound of coffee 80.00 guilders, a pound of butter 35.00 guilders, one egg 1.45 guilders. People are paying 14.00 guilders an ounce for Bulgarian tobacco! Everyone's trading on the black market; every errand boy has something to offer. The delivery boy from the bakery has supplied us with darning thread-90 cents for one measly skein-the milkman can get hold of ration books, an undertaker delivers cheese. Break-ins, murders and thefts are daily occurrences. Even the police and night watchmen are getting in on the act. Everyone wants to put food in their stomachs, and since salaries have been frozen, people have had to resort to swindling. The police have their hands full trying to track down the many girls of fifteen, sixteen, seventeen and older who are reported missing every day.

I want to try to finish my story about Ellen, the fairy. Just for fun, I can give it to Father on his birthday, together with all the copyrights.

See you later! (Actually, that's not the right phrase. In the German program broadcast from England they always close with "Aufwiederhoren." So I guess I should say, "Until we write again.")

Yours, Anne M. Frank

SUNDAY MORNING, MAY 7,1944

Dearest Kitty,

Father and I had a long talk yesterday afternoon. I cried my eyes out, and he cried too. Do you know what he said to me, Kitty?

"I've received many letters in my lifetime, but none as hurtful as this. You, who have had so much love from your parents. You, whose parents have always been ready to help you, who have always defended you, no matter what. You talk of not having to account to us for your actions! You feel you've been wronged and left to your own devices. No, Anne, you've done us a great injustice!

"Perhaps you didn't mean it that way, but that's what you wrote. No, Anne, we have done nothing to deserve such a reproach!"

Oh, I've failed miserably. This is the worst thing I've ever done in my entire life. I used my tears to show off, to make myself seem important so he'd respect me. I've certainly had my share of unhappiness, and everything I said about Mother is true. But to accuse Pim, who's so good and who's done everything for me-no, that was too cruel for words.

It's good that somebody has finally cut me down to size, has broken my pride, because I've been far too smug. Not everything Mistress Anne does is good! Any- one who deliberately causes such pain to someone they say they love is despicable, the lowest of the low!

What I'm most ashamed of is the way Father has forgiven me; he said he's going to throw the letter in the stove, and he's being so nice to me now, as if he were the one who'd done something wrong. Well, Anne, you still have a lot to learn. It's time you made a beginning, in- stead of looking down at others and always giving them the blame!

I've known a lot of sorrow, but who hasn't at my age? I've been putting on an act, but was hardly even aware of it. I've felt lonely, but never desperate! Not like Father, who once ran out into the street with a knife so he could put an end to it all. I've never gone that far.

I should be deeply ashamed of myself, and I am. What's done can't be undone, but at least you can keep it from happening again. I'd like to start all over, and that shouldn't be difficult, now that I have Peter. With him supporting me, I know I can do it! I'm not alone anymore. He loves me, I love him, I have my books, my writing and my diary. I'm not all that ugly, or that stupid, I have a sunny disposition, and I want to develop a good character!

Yes, Anne, you knew full well that your letter was unkind and untrue, but you were actually proud of it! I'll take Father as my example once again, and I will improve myself.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

MONDAY, MAY 8, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Have I ever told you anything about our family? I don't think I have, so let me begin. Father was born in Frankfurt am Main to very wealthy parents: Michael Frank owned a bank and became a millionaire, and Alice Stern's parents were prominent and well-to-do. Michael Frank didn't start out rich; he was a self-made man. In his youth Father led the life of a rich man's son. Parties every week, balls, banquets, beautiful girls, waltzing, dinners, a huge house, etc. After Grandpa died, most of the money was lost, and after the Great War and inflation there was nothing left at all. Up until the war there were still quite a few rich relatives. So Father was extremely well-bred, and he had to laugh yesterday because for the first time in his fifty-five years, he scraped out the frying pan at the table.

Mother's family wasn't as wealthy, but still fairly well-off, and we've listened openmouthed to stories of private balls, dinners and engagement parties with 250 guests.

We're far from rich now, but I've pinned all my hopes on after the war. I can assure you, I'm not so set on a bourgeois life as Mother and Margot. I'd like to spend a year in Paris and London learning the languages and studying art history. Compare that with Margot, who wants to nurse newborns in Palestine. I still have visions of gorgeous dresses and fascinating people. As I've told you many times before, I want to see the world and do all kinds of exciting things, and a little money won't hurt!

This morning Miep told us about her cousin's engagement party, which she went to on Saturday. The cousin's parents are rich, and the groom's are even richer. Miep made our mouths water telling us about the food that was served: vegetable soup with meatballs, cheese, rolls with sliced meat, hors d'oeuvres made with eggs and roast beef, rolls with cheese, genoise, wine and cigarettes, and you could eat as much as you wanted.

Miep drank ten schnapps and smoked three cigarettes -- could this be our temperance advocate? If Miep drank all those, I wonder how many her spouse managed to toss down? Everyone at the party was a little tipsy, of course. There were also two officers from the Homicide Squad, who took photographs of the wedding couple. You can see we're never far from Miep's thoughts, since she promptly noted their names and addresses in case anything should happen and we needed contacts with good Dutch people.

Our mouths were watering so much. We, who'd had nothing but two spoonfuls of hot cereal for breakfast and were absolutely famished; we, who get nothing but half-cooked spinach (for the vitamins!) and rotten pota- toes day after day; we, who fill our empty stomachs with nothing but boiled lettuce, raw lettuce, spinach, spinach and more spinach. Maybe we'll end up being as strong as Popeye, though up to now I've seen no sign of it!

If Miep had taken us along to the party, there wouldn't have been any rolls left over for the other guests. If we'd been there, we'd have snatched up everything in sight, including the furniture. I tell you, we were practically pulling the words right out of her mouth. We were gathered around her as if we'd never in all our lives heard of" delicious food or elegant people! And these are the granddaughters of the distinguished millionaire. The world is a crazy place!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

TUESDAY, MAY 9, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

I've finished my story about Ellen, the fairy. I've copied it out on nice notepaper, decorated it with red ink and sewn the pages together. The whole thing looks quite pretty, but I don't know if it's enough of a birthday present. Margot and Mother have both written poems.

Mr. Kugler came upstairs this afternoon with the news that starting Monday, Mrs. Broks would like to spend two hours in the office every afternoon. Just imagine! The office staff won't be able to come upstairs, the potatoes can't be delivered, Bep won't get her dinner, we can't go to the bathroom, we won't be able to move and all sorts of other inconveniences! We proposed a variety of ways to get rid of her. Mr. van Daan thought a good laxative in her coffee might do the trick. "No," Mr. Kleiman answered, "please don't, or we'll never get her off the can.

A roar of laughter. "The can?" Mrs. van D. asked. "What does that mean?" An explanation was given. "Is it all right to use that word?" she asked in perfect innocence. "Just imagine," Bep giggled, "there you are shopping at The Bijenkorf and you ask the way to the can. They wouldn't even know what you were talking about!"

Dussel now sits on the "can," to borrow the expression, every day at twelve-thirty on the dot. This afternoon I boldly took a piece of pink paper and wrote:

Mr. Dussel's Toilet Timetable

Mornings from 7: 15 to 7:30 A.M.
Afternoons after 1 P.M.
Otherwise, only as needed!

I tacked this to the green bathroom door while he was still inside. I might well have added' 'Transgressors will be subject to confinement!" Because our bathroom can be locked from both the inside and the outside.

Mr. van Daan's latest joke:

After a Bible lesson about Adam and Eve, a thirteen-year-old boy asked his father, "Tell me, Father, how did I get born?"

"Well," the father replied, "the stork plucked you out of the ocean, set you down in Mother's bed and bit her in the leg, hard. It bled so much she had to stay in bed for a week."

Not fully satisfied, the boy went to his mother. "Tell me, Mother," he asked, "how did you get born and how did I get born?"

His mother told him the very same story. Finally, hoping to hear the fine points, he went to his grandfather. "Tell me, Grandfather," he said, "how did you get born and how did your daughter get born?" And for the third time he was told exactly the same story.

That night he wrote in his diary: "After careful inquiry, I must conclude that there has been no sexual intercourse in our family for the last three generations!"

I still have work to do; it's already three o'clock.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

PS. Since I think I've mentioned the new cleaning lady, I just want to note that she's married, sixty years old and hard of hearing! Very convenient, in view of all the noise that eight people in hiding are capable of mak- ing.

Oh, Kit, it's such lovely weather. If only I could go outside!

WEDNESDAY, MAY 10, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

We were sitting in the attic yesterday afternoon working on our French when suddenly I heard the splatter of water behind me. I asked Peter what it might be. Without pausing to reply, he dashed up to the loft-the scene of the disaster -- and shoved Mouschi, who was squatting beside her soggy litter box, back to the right place. This was followed by shouts and squeals, and then Mouschi, who by that time had finished peeing, took off downstairs. In search of something similar to her box, Mouschi had found herself a pile of wood shavings, right over a crack in the floor. The puddle immediately trickled down to the attic and, as luck would have it, landed in and next to the potato barrel. The cethng was dripping, and since the attic floor has also got its share of cracks, little yellow drops were leaking through the ceiling and onto the dining table, between a pile of stockings and books.

I was doubled up with laughter, it was such a funny sight. There was Mouschi crouched under a chair, Peter armed with water, powdered bleach and a cloth, and Mr. van Daan trying to calm everyone down. The room was soon set to rights, but it's a well-known fact that cat puddles stink to high heaven. The potatoes proved that all too well, as did the wood shavings, which Father collected in a bucket and brought downstairs to burn.

Poor Mouschi! How were you to know it's impossible to get peat for your box?

Anne

THURSDAY, MAY 11, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

A new sketch to make you laugh:

Peter's hair had to be cut, and as usual his mother was to be the hairdresser. At seven twenty-five Peter vanished into his room, and reappeared at the stroke of seven-thirty, stripped down to his blue swimming trunks and a pair of tennis shoes.

"Are you coming?" he asked his mother.

"Yes, I'll be up in a minute, but I can't find the scissors!"

Peter helped her look, rummaging around in her cosmetics drawer. "Don't make such a mess, Peter," she grumbled.

I didn't catch Peter's reply, but it must have been insolent, because she cuffed him on the arm. He cuffed her back, she punched him with all her might, and Peter pulled his arm away with a look of mock horror on his face. "Come on, old girl!"

Mrs. van D. stayed put. Peter grabbed her by the wrists and pulled her all around the room. She laughed, cried, scolded and kicked, but nothing helped. Peter led his prisoner as far as the attic stairs, where he was obliged to let go of her. Mrs. van D. came back to the room and collapsed into a chair with a loud sigh.

"Die Enifu"hruna der Mutter,". I joked. [* The Abduction of Mother, a possible reference to Mozart's opera The Abduction from the Seraglio.]

"Yes, but he hurt me."

I went to have a look and cooled her hot, red wrists with water. Peter, still by the stairs and growing impa- tient again, strode into the room with his belt in his hand, like a lion tamer. Mrs. van D. didn't move, but stayed by her writing desk, looking for a handkerchief. "You've got to apologize first."

"All right, I hereby offer my apologies, but only because if I don't, we'll be here till midnight."

Mrs. van D. had to laugh in spite of herself. She got up and went toward the door, where she felt obliged to give us an explanation. (By us I mean Father, Mother and me; we were busy doing the dishes.) "He wasn't like this at home," she said. "I'd have belted him so hard he'd have gone flying down the stairs [!]. He's never been so insolent. This isn't the first time he's deserved a good hiding. That's what you get with a modern upbringing, modern children. I'd never have grabbed my mother like that. Did you treat your mother that way, Mr. Frank?" She was very upset, pacing back and forth, saying whatever came into her head, and she still hadn't gone upstairs. Finally, at long last, she made her exit.

Less than five minutes later she stormed back down the stairs, with her cheeks all puffed out, and flung her apron on a chair. When I asked if she was through, she replied that she was going downstairs. She tore down the stairs like a tornado, probably straight into the arms of her Putti.

She didn't come up again until eight, this time with her husband. Peter was dragged from the attic, given a merciless scolding and showered with abuse: ill-mannered brat, no-good bum, bad example, Anne this, Margot that, I couldn't hear the rest.

Everything seems to have calmed down again today!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

P.S. Tuesday and Wednesday evening our beloved Queen addressed the country. She's taking a vacation so she'll be in good health for her return to the Netherlands.

She used words like "soon, when I'm back in Holland," "a swift liberation," "heroism" and "heavy burdens."

This was followed by a speech by Prime Minister Gerbrandy. He has such a squeaky little child's voice that Mother instinctively said, "Oooh." A clergyman, who must have borrowed his voice from Mr. Edel, concluded by asking God to take care of the Jews, all those in concentration camps and prisons and everyone working in Germany.

THURSDAY, MAY 11, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Since I've left my entire "junk box" -- including my fountain pen -- upstairs and I'm not allowed to disturb the grown-ups during their nap time (until two-thirty), you'll have to make do with a letter in pencil.

I'm terribly busy at the moment, and strange as it may sound, I don't have enough time to get through my pile of work. Shall I tell you briefly what I've got to do? Well then, before tomorrow I have to finish reading the first volume of a biography of Galileo Galilei, since it has to be returned to the library. I started reading it yesterday and have gotten up to page 220 out of 320 pages, so I'll manage it. Next week I have to read Palestine at the Cross- roads and the second volume of Galilei. Besides that, I finished the first volume of a biography of Emperor Charles V yesterday, and I still have to work out the many genealogical charts I've collected and the notes I've taken. Next I have three pages of foreign words from my various books, all of which have to be written down, memorized and read aloud. Number four: my movie stars are in a terrible disarray and are dying to be straightened out, but since it'll take several days to do that and Professor Anne is, as she's already said, up to her ears in work, they'll have to put up with the chaos a while longer. Then there're Theseus, Oedipus, Peleus, Orpheus, Jason and Hercules all waiting to be untangled, since their various deeds are running crisscross through my mind like mul- ticolored threads in a dress. Myron and Phidias are also urgently in need of attention, or else I'll forget entirely how they fit into the picture. The same applies, for example, to the Seven Years' War and the Nine Years' War. Now I'm getting everything all mixed up. Well, what can you do with a memory like mine! Just imagine how forgetful I'll be when I'm eighty!

Oh, one more thing. The Bible. How long is it going to take before I come to the story of the bathing Susanna? And what do they mean by Sodom and Gomorrah? Oh, there's still so much to find out and learn. And in the meantime, I've left Charlotte of the Palatine in the lurch.

You can see, can't you, Kitty, that I'm full to bursting?

And now something else. You've known for a long time that my greatest wish is to be a journalist, and later on, a famous writer. We'll have to wait and see if these grand illusions (or delusions!) will ever come true, but up to now I've had no lack of topics. In any case, after the war I'd like to publish a book called The Secret Annex. It remains to be seen whether I'll succeed, but my diary can serve as the basis.

I also need to finish "Cady's Life." I've thought up the rest of the plot. After being cured in the sanatorium, Cady goes back home and continues writing to Hans. It's 1941, and it doesn't take her long to discover Hans's Nazi sympathies, and since Cady is deeply concerned with the plight of the Jews and of her friend Marianne, they begin drifting apart. They meet and get back together, but break up when Hans takes up with another girl. Cady is shattered, and because she wants to have a good job, she studies nursing. After graduation she accepts a position, at the urging of her father's friends, as a nurse in a TB sanatorium in Switzerland. During her first vacation she goes to Lake Como, where she runs into Hans. He tells her that two years earlier he'd married Cady's successor, but that his wife took her life in a fit of depression. Now that he's seen his little Cady again, he realizes how much he loves her, and once more asks for her hand in marriage. Cady refuses, even though, in spite of herself, she loves him as much as ever. But her pride holds her back. Hans goes away, and years later Cady learns that he's wound up in England, where he's struggling with ill health.

When she's twenty-seven, Cady marries a well-to-do man from the country, named Simon. She grows to love him, but not as much as Hans. She has two daughters and a son, Lthan, Judith and Nico. She and Simon are happy together, but Hans is always in the back of her mind until one night she dreams of him and says farewell.

. . .

It's not sentimental nonsense: it's based on the story of Father's life.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

SATURDAY, MAY 13, 1944

My dearest Kitty,

Yesterday was Father's birthday, Father and Mother's nineteenth wedding anniversary, a day without the cleaning lady. . . and the sun was shining as it's never shone before in 1944. Our chestnut tree is in full bloom. It's covered with leaves and is even more beautiful than last year.

Father received a biography of Linnaeus from Mr. Kleiman, a book on nature from Mr. Kugler, The Canals of Amsterdam from Dussel, a huge box from the van Daans (wrapped so beautifully it might have been done by a professional), containing three eggs, a bottle of beer, a jar of yogurt and a green tie. It made our jar of molasses seem rather paltry. My roses smelled wonderful compared to Miep and Bep's red carnations. He was thoroughly spoiled. Fifty petits fours arrived from Siemons'

Bakery, delicious! Father also treated us to spice cake, the men to beer and the ladies to yogurt. Everything was scrumptious!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

TUESDAY, MAY 16, 1944

My dearest Kitty, just for a change (since we haven't had one of these in so long) I'll recount a little discussion between Mr. and Mrs. van D. last night:

Mrs. van D.: "The Germans have had plenty of time to fortify the Atlantic Wall, and they'll certainly do everything within their power to hold back the British. It's amazing how strong the Germans are!"

Mr. van D.: "Oh, yes, amazing.

Mrs. van D.: "It is!"

Mr. van D.: "They are so strong they're bound to win the war in the end, is that what you mean?"

Mrs. van D.: "They might. I'm not convinced that they won't."

Mr. van D.: "I won't even answer that."

Mrs. van D.: "You always wind up answering. You let yourself get carried away, every single time."

Mr. van D.: "No, I don't. I always keep my answers to the bare minimum."

Mrs. van D.: "But you always do have an answer and you always have to be right! Your predictions hardly ever come true, you know!"

Mr. van D.: "So far they have."

Mrs. van D.: "No they haven't. You said the invasion was going to start last year, the Finns were supposed to have been out of the war by now, the Italian campaign ought to have been over by last winter, and the Russians should already have captured Lemberg. Oh no, I don't set much store by your predictions."

Mr. van D. (leaping to his feet): "Why don't you shut your trap for a change? I'll show you who's right; someday you'll get tired of needling me. I can't stand your bellyaching a minute longer. just wait, one day I'll make you eat your words!" (End of Act One.)

Actually, I couldn't help giggling. Mother couldn't either, and even Peter was biting his lips to keep from laughing. Oh, those stupid grown-ups. They need to learn a few things first before they start making so many remarks about the younger generation!

Since Friday we've been keeping the windows open again at night.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

What Our Annex Family Is Interested In
(A Systematic Survey of Courses and Readina Matter)

Mr. van Daan. No courses; looks up many things in Knaur's Encyclopedia and Lexicon; likes to read detective stories, medical books and love stories, exciting or trivial.

Mrs. van Daan. A correspondence course in English; likes to read biographical novels and occasionally other kinds of novels.

Mr. Frank. Is learning English (Dickens!) and a bit of Latin; never reads novels, but likes serious, rather dry descriptions of people and places.

Mrs. Frank. A correspondence course in English; reads everything except detective stories.

Mr. Dussel. Is learning English, Spanish and Dutch with no noticeable results; reads everything; goes along with the opinion of the majority.

Peter van Daan. Is learning English, French (correspondence course), shorthand in Dutch, English and German, commercial correspondence in English, woodworking, economics and sometimes math; seldom reads, sometimes geography.

Margot Frank. Correspondence courses in English, French and Latin, shorthand in English, German and Dutch, trigonometry, solid geometry, mechanics, phys- ics, chemistry, algebra, geometry, English literature, French literature, German literature, Dutch literature, bookkeeping, geography, modern history, biology, economics; reads everything, preferably on religion and medicine.

Anne Frank. Shorthand in French, English, German and Dutch, geometry, algebra, history, geography, art history, mythology, biology, Bible history, Dutch literature; likes to read biographies, dull or exciting, and history books (sometimes novels and light reading).

FRIDAY, MAY 19, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

I felt rotten yesterday. Vomiting (and that from Anne!), headache, stomachache and anything else you can imagine. I'm feeling better today. I'm famished, but I think I'll skip the brown beans we're having for dinner.

Everything's going fine between Peter and me. The poor boy has an even greater need for tenderness than I do. He still blushes every evening when he gets his good-night kiss, and then begs for another one. Am I merely a better substitute for Boche? I don't mind. He's so happy just knowing somebody loves him.

After my laborious conquest, I've distanced myself a little from the situation, but you mustn't think my love has cooled. Peter's a sweetheart, but I've slammed the door to my inner self; if he ever wants to force the lock again, he'll have to use a harder crowbar!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

SATURDAY, MAY 20, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Last night when I came down from the attic, I noticed, the moment I entered the room, that the lovely vase of carnations had fallen over. Mother was down on her hands and knees mopping up the water and Margot was fishing my papers off the floor. "What happened?" I asked with anxious foreboding, and before they could reply, I assessed the damage from across the room. My entire genealogy file, my notebooks, my books, everything was afloat. I nearly cried, and I was so upset I started speaking German. I can't remember a word, but according to Margot I babbled something about "unlioersehbarer Schaden, schrecklich, entsetzlich, nie zu ersetzen"* [* Incalculable loss, terrible, awful, irreplaceable.] and much more. Fadier burst out laughing and Modier and Margot joined in, but I felt like crying because all my work and elaborate notes were lost.

I took a closer look and, luckily, die "incalculable loss" wasn't as bad as I'd expected. Up in die attic I carefully peeled apart die sheets of paper diat were stuck togedier and dien hung diem on die clodiesline to dry. It was such a funny sight, even I had to laugh. Maria de' Medici alongside Charles V, William of Orange and Marie Antoinette.

"It's Rassenschande,"* Mr. van Daan joked. [An affront to racial purity.]

After entrusting my papers to Peter's care, I went back downstairs.

"Which books are ruined?" I asked Margot, who was going dirough them.

"Algebra," Margot said.

But as luck would have it, my algebra book wasn't entirely ruined. I wish it had fallen right in the vase. I've never loathed any book as much as that one. Inside the front cover are the names of at least twenty girls who had it before I did. It's old, yellowed, full of scribbles, crossed-out words and revisions. The next time I'm in a wicked mood, I'm going to tear the darned thing to pieces!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

MONDAY, MAY 22,1944

Dearest Kitty,

On May 20, Father lost his bet and had to give five jars of yogurt to Mrs. van Daan: the invasion still hasn't begun. I can safely say that all of Amsterdam, all of Holland, in fact the entire western coast of Europe, all the way down to Spain, are talking about the invasion day and night, debating, making bets and . . . hoping.

The suspense is rising to fever pitch; by no means has everyone we think of as "good" Dutch people kept their faith in the English, not everyone thinks the English bluff is a masterful strategical move. Oh no, people want deeds-great, heroic deeds.

No one can see farther than the end of their nose, no one gives a thought to the fact that the British are fighting for their own country and their own people; everyone thinks it's England's duty to save Holland, as quickly as possible. What obligations do the English have toward us? What have the Dutch done to deserve the generous help they so clearly expect? Oh no, the Dutch are very much mistaken. The English, despite their bluff, are certainly no more to blame for the war than all the other countries, large and small, that are now occupied by the Germans. The British are not about to offer their excuses; true, they were sleeping during the years Germany was rearming itself, but all the other countries, especially those bordering on Germany, were asleep too. England and the rest of the world have discovered that burying your head in the sand doesn't work, and now each of them, especially England, is having to pay a heavy price for its ostrich policy.

No country sacrifices its men without reason, and certainly not in the interests of another, and England is no exception. The invasion, liberation and freedom will come someday; yet England, not the occupied territories, will choose the moment.

To our great sorrow and dismay, we've heard that many people have changed their attitude toward us Jews. We've been told that anti-Semitism has cropped up in circles where once it would have been unthinkable. This fact has affected us all very, very deeply. The reason for the hatred is understandable, maybe even human, but that doesn't make it right. According to the Christians, the Jews are blabbing their secrets to the Germans, denouncing their helpers and causing them to suffer the dreadful fate and punishments that have already been meted out to so many. All of this is true. But as with everything, they should look at the matter from both sides: would Christians act any differently if they were in our place? Could anyone, regardless of whether they're Jews or Christians, remain silent in the face of German pressure? Everyone knows it's practically impossible, so why do they ask the impossible of the Jews?

It's being said in underground circles that the German Jews who immigrated to Holland before the war and have now been sent to Poland shouldn't be allowed to return here. They were granted the right to asylum in Holland, but once Hitler is gone, they should go back to Germany.

When you hear that, you begin to wonder why we're fighting this long and difficult war. We're always being told that we're fighting for freedom, truth and justice! The war isn't even over, and already there's dissension and Jews are regarded as lesser beings. Oh, it's sad, very sad that the old adage has been confirmed for the umpteenth time: "What one Christian does is his own responsibthty, what one Jew does reflects on all Jews."

To be honest, I can't understand how the Dutch, a nation of good, honest, upright people, can sit in judgment on us the way they do. On us-the most oppressed, unfortunate and pitiable people in all the world.

I have only one hope: that this anti-Semitism is just a passing thing, that the Dutch will show their true colors, that they'll never waver from what they know in their hearts to be just, for this is unjust!

And if they ever carry out this terrible threat, the meager handful of Jews still left in Holland will have to go. We too will have to shoulder our bundles and move on, away from this beautiful country, which once so kindly took us in and now turns its back on us.

I love Holland. Once I hoped it would become a fatherland to me, since I had lost my own. And I hope so still!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

THURSDAY, MAY 25, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Bep's engaged! The news isn't much of a surprise, though none of us are particularly pleased. Bertus may be a nice, steady, athletic young man, but Bep doesn't love him, and to me that's enough reason to advise her against marrying him.

Bep's trying to get ahead in the world, and Bertus is pulling her back; he's a laborer, without any interests or any desire to make something of himself, and I don't think that'll make Bep happy. I can understand Bep's wanting to put an end to her indecision; four weeks ago she decided to write him off, but then she felt even worse. So she wrote him a letter, and now she's engaged.

There are several factors involved in this engagement. First, Bep's sick father, who likes Bertus very much. Second, she's the oldest of the Voskuijl girls and her mother teases her about being an old maid. Third, she's just turned twenty-four, and that matters a great deal to Bep.

Mother said it would have been better if Bep had simply had an affair with Bertus. I don't know, I feel sorry for Bep and can understand her loneliness. In any case, they can get married only after the war, since Bertus is in hiding, or at any rate has gone underground. Besides, they don't have a penny to their name and nothing in the way of a hope chest. What a sorry prospect for Bep, for whom we all wish the best. I only hope Bertus improves under her influence, or that Bep finds another man, one who knows how to appreciate her!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

THE SAME DAY

There's something happening every day. This morning Mr. van Hoeven was arrested. He was hiding two Jews in his house. It's a heavy blow for us, not only because those poor Jews are once again balancing on the edge of an abyss, but also because it's terrible for Mr. van Hoeven.

The world's been turned upside down. The most decent people are being sent to concentration camps, prisons and lonely cells, while the lowest of the low rule over young and old, rich and poor. One gets caught for black marketeering, another for hiding Jews or other un- fortunate souls. Unless you're a Nazi, you don't know what's going to happen to you from one day to the next.

Mr. van Hoeven is a great loss to us too. Bep can't possibly lug such huge amounts of potatoes all the way here, nor should she have to, so our only choice is to eat fewer of them. I'll tell you what we have in mind, but it's certainly not going to make life here any more agreeable. Mother says we'll skip breakfast, eat hot cereal and bread for lunch and fried potatoes for dinner and, if possible, vegetables or lettuce once or twice a week. That's all there is. We're going to be hungry, but nothing's worse than being caught.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

FRIDAY, MAY 26, 1944

My dearest Kitty,

At long, long last, I can sit quietly at my table before the crack in the window frame and write you everything, everything I want to say.

I feel more miserable than I have in months. Even after the break-in I didn't feel so utterly broken, inside and out. On the one hand, there's the news about Mr. van Hoeven, the Jewish question (which is discussed in detail by everyone in the house), the invasion (which is so long in coming), the awful food, the tension, the misera- ble atmosphere, my disappointment in Peter. On the other hand, there's Bep's engagement, the Pentecost reception, the flowers, Mr. Kugler's birthday, cakes and stories about cabarets, movies and concerts. That gap, that enormous gap, is always there. One day we're laugh- ing at the comical side of life in hiding, and the next day (and there are many such days), we're frightened, and the fear, tension and despair can be read on our faces.

Miep and Mr. Kugler bear the greatest burden for us, and for all those in hiding-Miep in everything she does and Mr. Kugler through his enormous responsibthty for the eight of us, which is sometimes so overwhelming that he can hardly speak from the pent-up tension and strain. Mr. Kleiman and Bep also take very good care of us, but they're able to put the Annex out of their minds, even if it's only for a few hours or a few days. They have their own worries, Mr. Kleiman with his health and Bep with her engagement, which isn't looking very promising lat the moment. But they also have their outings, their visits with friends, their everyday lives as ordinary people, so that the tension is sometimes relieved, if only for a short while, while ours never is, never has been, not once in the two years we've been here. How much longer will this increasingly oppressive, unbearable weight press I down on us?

The drains are clogged again. We can't run the wa- ter, or if we do, only a trickle; we can't flush the toilet, so we have to use a toilet brush; and we've been putting our dirty water into a big earthenware jar. We can man- age for today, but what will happen if the plumber can't fix it on his own? The Sanitation Department can't come until Tuesday.

Miep sent us a raisin bread with "Happy Pentecost" written on top. It's almost as if she were mocking us, since our moods and cares are far from "happy."

We've all become more frightened since the van Hoeven business. Once again you hear "shh" from all I sides, and we're doing everything more quietly. The police forced the door there; they could just as easily do that here too! What will we do if we're ever. . . no, I mustn't write that down. But the question won't let itself be pushed to the back of my mind today; on the contrary, all the fear I've ever felt is looming before me in all its horror.

I had to go downstairs alone at eight this evening to use the bathroom. There was no one down there, since they were all listening to the radio. I wanted to be brave, but it was hard. I always feel safer upstairs than in that huge, silent house; when I'm alone with those mysterious muffied sounds from upstairs and the honking of horns in the street, I have to hurry and remind myself where I am to keep from getting the shivers.

Miep has been acting much nicer toward us since her talk with Father. But I haven't told you about that yet. Miep came up one afternoon all flushed and asked Father straight out if we thought they too were infected with the current anti-Semitism. Father was stunned and quickly talked her out of the idea, but some of Miep's suspicion has lingered on. They're doing more errands for us now and showing more of an interest in our troubles, though we certainly shouldn't bother them with our woes. Oh, they're such good, noble people!

I've asked myself again and again whether it wouldn't have been better if we hadn't gone into hiding, if we were dead now and didn't have to go through this misery, especially so that the others could be spared the burden. But we all shrink from this thought. We still love life, we haven't yet forgotten the voice of nature, and we keep hoping, hoping for. . . everything.

Let something happen soon, even an air raid. Nothing can be more crushing than this anxiety. Let the end come, however cruel; at least then we'll know whether we are to be the victors or the vanquished.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

WEDNESDAY, MAY 31, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Saturday, Sunday, Monday and Tuesday it was too hot to hold my fountain pen, which is why I couldn't write to you. Friday the drains were clogged, Saturday they were fixed. Mrs. Kleiman came for a visit in the afternoon and told us a lot about Jopiej she and Jacque van Maarsen are in the same hockey club. Sunday Bep dropped by to make sure there hadn't been a break-in and stayed for breakfast. Monday (a holiday because of Pentecost), Mr. Gies served as the Annex watchman, and Tuesday we were finally allowed to open the windows. We've seldom had a Pentecost weekend that was so beautiful and warm. Or maybe "hot" is a better word. Hot weather is horrible in the Annex. To give you an idea of the numerous complaints, I'll briefly describe these sweltering days.

Saturday: "Wonderful, what fantastic weather," we all said in the morning. "If only it weren't quite so hot," we said in the afternoon, when the windows had to be shut.

Sunday: "The heat's unbearable, the butter's melt- ing, there's not a cool spot anywhere in the house, the bread's drying out, the milk's going sour, the windows can't be opened. We poor outcasts are suffocating while everyone else is enjoying their Pentecost." (According to Mrs. van D.)

Monday: "My feet hurt, I have nothing cool to wear, I can't do the dishes in this heat!" Grumbling from early in the morning to late at night. It was awful.

I can't stand the heat. I'm glad the wind's come up today, but that the sun's still shining.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

FRIDAY, JUNE 2, 1944 J

Dear Kitty,

"If you're going to the attic, take an umbrella with you, preferably a large one!" This is to protect you from "household showers." There's a Dutch proverb: "High and dry, safe and sound," but it obviously doesn't apply to wartime (guns!) and to people in hiding (cat box!). Mouschi's gotten into the habit of relieving herself on some newspapers or between the cracks in the floor boards, so we have good reason to fear the splatters and, even worse, the stench. The new Moortje in the warehouse has the same problem. Anyone who's ever had a cat that's not housebroken can imagine the smells, other than pepper and thyme, that permeate this house.

I also have a brand-new prescription for gunfire jitters: When the shooting gets loud, proceed to the nearest wooden staircase. Run up and down a few times, making sure to stumble at least once. What with the scratches and the noise of running and falling, you won't even be able to hear the shooting, much less worry about it. Yours truly has put this magic formula to use, with great success! 

Yours, Anne M. Frank

MONDAY, JUNE 5, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

New problems in the Annex. A quarrel between Dussel and the Franks over the division of butter. Capitulation on the part of Dussel. Close friendship between the latter and Mrs. van Daan, flirtations, kisses and friendly little smiles. Dussel is beginning to long for female companionship.

The van Daans don't see why we should bake a spice cake for Mr. Kugler's birthday when we can't have one ourselves. All very petty. Mood upstairs: bad. Mrs. van D. has a cold. Dussel caught with brewer's yeast tablets, while we've got none.

The Fifth Army has taken Rome. The city neither destroyed nor bombed. Great propaganda for Hitler.

Very few potatoes and vegetables. One loaf of bread was moldy.

Scharminkeltje (name of new warehouse cat) can't stand pepper. She sleeps in the cat box and does her business in the wood shavings. Impossible to keep her.

Bad weather. Continuous bombing of Pas de Calais and the west coast of France.

No one buying dollars. Gold even less interesting.

The bottom of our black moneybox is in sight. What are we going to live on next month?

Yours, Anne M. Frank

TUESDAY, JUNE 6, 1944

My dearest Kitty,

"This is D Day," the BBC announced at twelve.

"This is the day." The invasion has begun!

This morning at eight the British reported heavy bombing of Calais, Boulogne, Le Havre and Cherbourg, as well as Pas de Calais (as usual). Further, as a precautionary measure for those in the occupied territories, everyone living within a zone of twenty miles from the coast was warned to prepare for bombardments. Where possible, the British will drop pamphlets an hour ahead of time.

According to the German news, British paratroopers have landed on the coast of France. "British landing craft are engaged in combat with German naval units," according to the BBC.

Conclusion reached by the Annex while breakfasting at nine: this is a trial landing, like the one two years ago in Dieppe.

BBC broadcast in German, Dutch, French and other languages at ten: The invasion has begun! So this is the "real" invasion. BBC broadcast in German at eleven: speech by Supreme Commander General Dwight Eisenhower.

BBC broadcast in English: "This is 0 Day." General Eisenhower said to the French people: "Stiff fighting will come now, but after this the victory. The year 1944 is the year of complete victory. Good luck!"

BBC broadcast in English at one: 11,000 planes are shuttling back and forth or standing by to land troops and bomb behind enemy lines; 4,000 landing craft and small boats are continually arriving in the area between Cher- bourg and Le Havre. English and American troops are already engaged in heavy combat. Speeches by Gerbrandy, the Prime Minister of Belgium, King Haakon of Norway, de Gaulle of France, the King of England and, last but not least, Churchill.

A huge commotion in the Annex! Is this really the beginning of the long-awaited liberation? The liberation we've all talked so much about, which still seems too good, too much of a fairy tale ever to come true? Will this year, 1944, bring us victory? We don't know yet. But where there's hope, there's life. It fills us with fresh courage and makes us strong again. We'll need to be brave to endure the many fears and hardships and the suffering yet to come. It's now a matter of remaining calm and steadfast, of gritting our teeth and keeping a stiff upper lip! France, Russia, Italy, and even Germany, can cry out in agony, but we don't yet have that right!

Oh, Kitty, the best part about the invasion is that I have the feeling that friends are on the way. Those terrible Germans have oppressed and threatened us for so long that the thought of friends and salvation means everything to us! Now it's not just the Jews, but Holland and all of occupied Europe. Maybe, Margot says, I can even go back to school in October or September.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

P.S. I'll keep you informed of the latest news!

This morning and last night, dummies made of straw and rubber were dropped from the air behind German lines, and they exploded the minute they hit the ground. Many paratroopers, their faces blackened so they couldn't be seen in the dark, landed as well. The French coast was bombarded with 5,500 tons of bombs during the night, and then, at six in the morning, the first landing craft came ashore. Today there were 20,000 airplanes in action. The German coastal batteries were destroyed even before the landing; a small bridgehead has already been formed. Everything's going well, despite the bad weather. The army and the people are "one will and one hope."

FRIDAY, JUNE 9, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Great news of the invasion! The Allies have taken Bayeux, a village on the coast of France, and are now fighting for Caen. They're clearly intending to cut off the peninsula where Cherbourg is located. Every evening the war correspondents report on the difficulties, the courage and the fighting spirit of the army. To get their stories, they pull off the most amazing feats. A few of the wounded who are already back in England also spoke on the radio. Despite the miserable weather, the planes are flying dthgently back and forth. We heard over the BBC that Churchill wanted to land along with the troops on D Day, but Eisenhower and the other generals managed to talk him out of it. Just imagine, so much courage for such an old man he must be at least seventy!

The excitement here has died down somewhat; still, we're all hoping that the war will finally be over by the end of the year. It's about time! Mrs. van Daan's constant griping is unbearable; now that she can no longer drive us crazy with the invasion, she moans and groans all day about the bad weather. If only we could plunk her down in the loft in a bucket of cold water!

Everyone in the Annex except Mr. van Daan and Peter has read the Hunaarian Rhapsody trilogy, a biography of the composer, piano virtuoso and child prodigy Franz Liszt. It's very interesting, though in my opinion there's a bit too much emphasis on women; Liszt was not only the greatest and most famous pianist of his time, he was also the biggest womanizer, even at the age of seventy. He had an affair with Countess Marie d' Agoult, Princess Carolyne Sayn- Wittgenstein, the dancer Lola Montez, the pianist Agnes Kingworth, the pianist Sophie Menter, the Circassian princess Olga Janina, Baroness Olga Meyen- dorff, actress Lilla what's-her-name, etc., etc., and there's no end to it. Those parts of the book dealing with music and the other arts are much more interesting. Some of the people mentioned are Schumann, Clara Wieck, Hector Berlioz, Johannes Brahms, Beethoven, Joachim, Richard Wagner, Hans von Bulow, Anton Rubinstein, Frederic Chopin, Victor Hugo, Honore de Balzac, Hiller, Hummel, Czerny, Rossini, Cherubini, Paganini, Mendels- sohn, etc., etc.

Liszt appears to have been a decent man, very generous and modest, though exceptionally vain. He helped others, put art above all else, was extremely fond of cognac and women, couldn't bear the sight of tears, was a gentleman, couldn't refuse anyone a favor, wasn't interested in money and cared about religious freedom and the world.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

314 ANNE FRANK

TUESDAY, JUNE 13, 1944

Dearest Kit,

Another birthday has gone by, so I'm now fifteen. I received quite a few gifts: Springer's five-volume art history book, a set of underwear, two belts, a handkerchief, two jars of yogurt, a jar of jam, two honey cookies (small), a botany book from Father and Mother, a gold bracelet from Margot, a sticker album from the van Daans, Biomalt and sweet peas from Dussel, candy from Miep, candy and notebooks from Bep, and the high point: the book Maria Theresa and three slices of full-cream cheese from Mr. Kugler. Peter gave me a lovely bouquet of peonies; the poor boy had put a lot of effort into finding a present, but nothing quite worked out.

The invasion is still going splendidly, in spite of the miserable weather -- pouring rains, gale winds and high seas. 

Yesterday Churchill, Smuts, Eisenhower and Arnold visited the French villages that the British have captured and liberated. Churchill was on a torpedo boat that shelled the coast. Uke many men, he doesn't seem to know what fear is -- an enviable trait!

From our position here in Fort Annex, it's difficult to gauge the mood of the Dutch. No doubt many people are glad the idle (!) British have finally rolled up their sleeves and gotten down to work. Those who keep claim- ing they don't want to be occupied by the British don't realize how unfair they're being. Their line of reasoning boils down to this: England must fight, struggle and sacri- fice its sons to liberate Holland and the other occupied countries. After that the British shouldn't remain in Hol- land: they should offer their most abject apologies to all the occupied countries, restore the Dutch East Indies to its rightful owner and then return, weakened and impoverished, to England. What a bunch of idiots. And yet, as I've already said, many Dutch people can be counted among their ranks. What would have become of Holland and its neighbors if England had signed a peace treaty with Germany, as it's had ample opportunity to do? Holland would have become German, and that would have been the end of that!

All those Dutch people who still look down on the British, scoff at England and its government of old fogies, call the English cowards, yet hate the Germans, should be given a good shaking, the way you'd plump up a pillow. Maybe that would straighten out their jumbled brains!

Wishes, thoughts, accusations and reproaches are swirling around in my head. I'm not really as conceited as many people think; I know my various faults and shortcomings better than anyone else, but there's one difference: I also know that I want to change, will change and already have changed greatly!

Why is it, I often ask myself, that everyone still thinks I'm so pushy and such a know-it-all? Am I really so arrogant? Am I the one who's so arrogant, or are they? It sounds crazy, I know, but I'm not going to cross out that last sentence, because it's not as crazy as it seems. Mrs. van Daan and Dussel, my two chief accusers, are known to be totally unintelligent and, not to put too fine a point on it, just plain "stupid"! Stupid people usually can't bear it when others do something better than they do; the best examples of this are those two dummies, Mrs. van Daan and Dussel. Mrs. van D. thinks I'm stupid because I don't suffer so much from this ailment as she does, she thinks I'm pushy because she's even pushier, she thinks my dresses are too short because hers are even shorter, and she thinks I'm such a know-it-all because she talks twice as much as I do about topics she knows nothing about. The same goes for Dussel. But one of my favorite sayings is "Where there's smoke there's fire," and I readily admit I'm a know-it-all.

What's so difficult about my personality is that I scold and curse myself much more than anyone else does; if Mother adds her advice, the pile of sermons becomes so thick that I despair of ever getting through them. Then I talk back and start contradicting everyone until the old famthar Anne refrain inevitably crops up again: "No one understands me!"

This phrase is part of me, and as unlikely as it may seem, there's a kernel of truth in it. Sometimes I'm so deeply buried under self-reproaches that I long for a word of comfort to help me dig myself out again. If only I had someone who took my feelings seriously. Alas, I haven't yet found that person, so the search must go on.

I know you're wondering about Peter, aren't you, Kit? It's true, Peter loves me, not as a girlfriend, but as a friend. His affection grows day by day, but some mysterious force is holding us back, and I don't know what it is.

Sometimes I think my terrible longing for him was overexaggerated. But that's not true, because if I'm unable to go to his room for a day or two, I long for him as desperately as I ever did. Peter is kind and good, and yet I can't deny that he's disappointed me in many ways. I especially don't care for his dislike of religion, his table conversations and various things of that nature. Still, I'm firmly convinced that we'll stick to our agreement never to quarrel. Peter is peace-loving, tolerant and extremely easygoing. He lets me say a lot of things to him that he'd never accept from his mother. He's making a determined effort to remove the blots from his copybook and keep his affairs in order. Yet why does he hide his innermost self and never allow me access? Of course, he's much more closed than I am, but I know from experience (even though I'm constantly being accused of knowing all there is to know in theory, but not in practice) that in time, even the most uncommunicative types will long as much, or even more, for someone to confide in.

Peter and I have both spent our contemplative years in the Annex. We often discuss the future, the past and the present, but as I've already told you, I miss the real thing, and yet I know it exists!

Is it because I haven't been outdoors for so long that I've become so smitten with nature? I remember a time when a magnificent blue sky, chirping birds, moonlight and budding blossoms wouldn't have captivated me. Things have changed since I came here. One night during the Pentecost holiday, for instance, when it was so hot, I struggled to keep my eyes open until eleven-thirty so I could get a good look at the moon, all on my own for once. Alas, my sacrifice was in vain, since there was too much glare and I couldn't risk opening a window. An- other time, several months ago, I happened to be upstairs one night when the window was open. I didn't go back down until it had to be closed again. The dark, rainy evening, the wind, the racing clouds, had me spellbound; it was the first time in a year and a half that I'd seen the night face-to-face. After that evening my longing to see it again was even greater than my fear of burglars, a dark rat-infested house or robberies. I went downstairs all by myself and looked out the windows in the kitchen and private office. Many people think nature is beautiful, many people sleep from time to time under the starry sky, and many people in hospitals and prisons long for the day when they'll be free to enjoy what nature has to offer. But few are as isolated and cut off as we are from dle joys of nature, which can be shared by rich and poor alike.

It's not just my imagination -- looking at dle sky, dle clouds, dle moon and dle stars really does make me feel calm and hopeful. It's much better medicine than valerian or bromide. Nature makes me feel humble and ready to face every blow with courage!

As luck would have it, I'm only able -- except for a few rare occasions-to view nature through dusty curtains tacked over dirt-caked windows; it takes dle pleasure out of looking. Nature is dle one thing for which dlere is no substitute!

One of dle many questions that have often bodlered me is why women have been, and still are, thought to be so inferior to men. It's easy to say it's unfair, but that's not enough for me; I'd really like to know the reason for this great injustice!

Men presumably dominated women from the very beginning because of their greater physical strength; it's men who earn a living, beget children and do as they please. . . Until recently, women silently went along willi this, which was stupid, since the longer it's kept up, the more deeply entrenched it becomes. Fortunately, education, work and progress have opened women's eyes. In many countries they've been granted equal rights; many people, mainly women, but also men, now realize how wrong it was to tolerate this state of affairs for so long. Modern women want the right to be completely independent!

But that's not all. Women should be respected as well! Generally speaking, men are held in great esteem in all parts ofthe world, so why shouldn't women have their share? Soldiers and war heroes are honored and commemorated, explorers are granted immortal fame, martyrs are revered, but how many people look upon women too as soldiers?

In the book Soldiers on the Home Front I was greatly struck by the fact that in childbirth alone, women commonly suffer more pain, illness and misery than any war hero ever does. And what's her reward for enduring all that pain? She gets pushed aside when she's disfigured by birth, her children soon leave, her beauty is gone. Women, who struggle and suffer pain to ensure the con- tinuation of the human race, make much tougher and more courageous soldiers than all those big-mouthed freedom-fighting heroes put together!

I don't mean to imply that women should stop having children; on the contrary, nature intended them to, and that's the way it should be. What I condemn are our system of values and the men who don't acknowledge how great, difficult, but ultimately beautiful women's share in society is.

I agree completely with Paul de Kruif, the author of this book, when he says that men must learn that birth is no longer thought of as inevitable and unavoidable in those parts of the world we consider civthzed. It's easy for men to talk -- they don't and never will have to bear the woes that women do!

I believe that in the course of the next century the notion that it's a woman's duty to have children will change and make way for the respect and admiration of all women, who bear their burdens without complaint or a lot of pompous words!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

FRIDAY, JUNE 16, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

New problems: Mrs. van D. is at her wit's end. She's talking about getting shot, being thrown in prison, being hanged and suicide. She's jealous that Peter confides in me and not in her, offended that Dussel doesn't re- spond sufficiently to her flirtations and afraid her husband's going to squander all the fur-coat money on to- bacco. She quarrels, curses, cries, feels sorry for herself, laughs and starts allover again.

What on earth can you do with such a silly, sniveling specimen of humanity? Nobody takes her seriously, she has no strength of character, she complains to one and all, and you should see how she walks around: von hinten Lyzeum, yon vorne Museum.* [Acts like a schoolgirl, looks like a frump.] Even worse, Peter's becoming insolent, Mr. van Daan irritable and Mother cynical. Yes, everyone's in quite a state! There's only one rule you need to remember: laugh at everything and forget everybody else! It sounds egotistical, but it's actually the only cure for those suffering from self-pity.

Mr. Kugler's supposed to spend four weeks in Alkmaar on a work detail. He's trying to get out of it with a doctor's certificate and a letter from Opekta. Mr. Kleiman's hoping his stomach will be operated on soon. Starting at eleven last night, all private phones were cut off.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

FRIDAY, JUNE 23, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Nothing special going on here. The British have begun their all-out attack on Cherbourg. According to Pim and Mr. van Oaan, we're sure to be liberated before October 10. The Russians are taking part in the cam- paign; yesterday they started their offensive near Vitebsk, exactly three years to the day that the Germans invaded Russia.

Bep's spirits have sunk lower than ever. We're nearly out of potatoes; from now on, we're going to count them out for each person, then everyone can do what they want with them. Starting Monday, Miep's taking a week of vacation. Mr. Kleiman's doctors haven't found anything on the X rays. He's torn between having an operation and letting matters take their course.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

TUESDAY, JUNE 27, 1944

My dearest Kitty,

The mood has changed, everything's going enormously well. Cherbourg, Vitebsk and Zhlobin fell today. They're sure to have captured lots of men and equipment. Five German generals were killed near Cherbourg and two taken captive. Now that they've got a harbor, the British can bring whatever they want on shore. The whole Cotentin Peninsula has been captured just three weeks after the invasion! What a feat!

In the three weeks since D Day there hasn't been a day without rain and storms, neither here nor in France, but this bad luck hasn't kept the British and the Americans from displaying their might. And how! Of course, the Germans have launched their wonder weapon, but a little firecracker like that won't hardly make a dent, except maybe minor damage in England and screaming headlines in the Kraut newspapers. Anyway, when they realize in "Krautland" that the Bolsheviks really are getting closer, they'll be shaking in their boots.

All German women who aren't working for the military are being evacuated, together with their children, from the coastal regions to the provinces of Groningen, Friesland and Gelderland. Mussert* [* The leader of the Dutch National Socialist (Nazi) Party] has announced that if the invasion reaches Holland, he'll enlist. Is that fat pig planning to fight? He could have done that in Russia long before now. Finland turned down a peace offer some time ago, and now the negotiations have been broken off again. Those numbskulls, they'll be sorry!

How far do you think we'll be on July 27?

Yours, Anne M. Frank

FRIDAY, JUNE 30, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Bad weather from one at a stretch to the thirty June* [Anne's English.] Don't I say that well? Oh yes, I already know a little English; just to prove it I'm reading An Ideal Husband with the help of a dictionary! War's going wonderfully: Bobruysk, Mogilev and Orsha have fallen, lots of prisoners.

Everything's all right here. Spirits are improving, our superoptimists are triumphant, the van Daans are doing disappearing acts with the sugar, Bep' s changed her hair, and Miep has a week off. That's the latest news!

I've been having really ghastly root-canal work done on one of my front teeth. It's been terribly painful. It was so bad Dussel thought I was going to faint, and I nearly did. Mrs. van D. promptly got a toothache as well!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

P.S. We've heard from Basel that Bernd* [Cousin Bernhard (Buddy) Elias]. played the part of the innkeeper in Minna von Barnhelm. He has "artistic leanings," says Mother.

THURSDAY, JULY 6, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

My blood runs cold when Peter talks about becoming a criminal or a speculator; of course, he's joking, but I still have the feeling he's afraid of his own weakness.

Margot and Peter are always saying to me, "If I had your spunk and your strength, if I had your drive and unflagging energy, could. . . 

Is it really such an admirable trait not to let myself be influenced by others? Am I right in following my own conscience?

To be honest, I can't imagine how anyone could say "I'm weak" and then stay that way. If you know that about yourself, why not fight it, why not develop your character? Their answer has always been: "Because it's much easier not to!" This reply leaves me feeling rather discouraged. Easy? Does that mean a life of deceit and laziness is easy too? Oh no, that can't be true. It can't be true that people are so readily tempted by ease. . . and money. I've given a lot of thought to what my answer should be, to how I should get Peter to believe in himself and, most of all, to change himself for the better. I don't know whether I'm on the right track.

I've often imagined how nice it would be if someone were to confide everything to me. But now that it's reached that point, I realize how difficult it is to put yourself in someope else's shoes and find the right answer. Especially since "easy" and "money" are new and com- pletely alien concepts to me.

Peter's beginning to lean on me and I don't want that, not under any circumstances. It's hard enough standing on your own two feet, but when you also have to remain true to your character and soul, it's harder still.

I've been drifting around at sea, have spent days searching for an effective antidote to that terrible word "easy." How can I make it clear to him that, while it may seem easy and wonderful, it will drag him down to the depths, to a place where he'll no longer find friends, support or beauty, so far down that he may never rise to the surface again?

We're all alive, but we don't know why or what for; we're all searching for happiness; we're all leading lives that are different and yet the same. We three have been raised in good famthes, we have the opportunity to get an education and make something of ourselves. We have many reasons to hope for great happiness, but. . . we have to earn it. And that's something you can't achieve by taking the easy way out. Earning happiness means doing good and working, not speculating and being lazy. Laziness may look inviting, but only work gives you true satisfaction.

I can't understand people who don't like to work, but that isn't Peter's problem either. He just doesn't have a goal, plus he thinks he's too stupid and inferior to ever achieve anything. Poor boy, he's never known how it feels to make someone else happy, and I'm afraid I can't teach him. He isn't religious, scoffs at Jesus Christ and takes the Lord's name in vain, and though I'm not Orthodox either, it hurts me every time to see him so lonely, so scornful, so wretched.

People who are religious should be glad, since not everyone is blessed with the ability to believe in a higher order. You don't even have to live in fear of eternal punishment; the concepts of purgatory, heaven and hell are difficult for many people to accept, yet religion itself, any religion, keeps a person on the right path. Not the fear of God, but upholding your own sense of honor and obeying your own conscience. How noble and good everyone could be if, at the end of each day, they were to review their own behavior and weigh up the rights and wrongs. They would automatically try to do better at the start of each new day and, after a while, would certainly accomplish a great deal. Everyone is welcome to this prescription; it costs nothing and is definitely useful. Those who don't know will have to find out by experience that "a quiet conscience gives you strength!"

Yours, Anne M. Frank

SATURDAY, JULY 8, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

Mr. Broks was in Beverwijk and managed to get hold of strawberries at the produce auction. They arrived here dusty and full of sand, but in large quantities. No less than twenty-four crates for the office and us. That very same evening we canned the first six jars and made eight jars of jam. The next morning Miep started making jam for the office.

At twelve-thirty the outside door was locked, crates were lugged into the kitchen, with Peter, Father and Mr. van Daan stumbling up the stairs. Anne got hot water from the water heater, Margot"",went for a bucket, all hands on deck! With a funny feeling in my stomach, I entered the overcrowded office kitchen. Miep, Bep, Mr. Kleiman, Jan, Father, Peter: the Annex contingent and the Supply Corps all mixed up together, and that in the middle of the day! Curtains and windows open, loud voices, banging doors -- I was trembling with excitement. I kept thinking, "Are we really in hiding?" This must be how it feels when you can finally go out into the world again. The pan was full, so I dashed upstairs, where the rest of the family was hulling strawberries around the kitchen table. At least that's what they were supposed to be doing, but more was going into their mouths than into the buckets. They were bound to need another bucket soon. Peter went back downstairs, but then the doorbell rang twice. Leaving the bucket where it was, Peter raced upstairs and shut the bookcase behind him. We sat kicking our heels impatiently; the strawberries were waiting to be rinsed, but we stuck to the house rule: "No running water when strangers are downstairs -- they might hear the drains."

Jan came up at one to tell us it had been the mail- man. Peter hurried downstairs again. Ding-dong. . . the doorbell, about-face. I listened to hear if anyone was coming, standing first at the bookcase, then at the top of the stairs. Finally Peter and I leaned over the banister, straining our ears like a couple of burglars to hear the sounds from downstairs. No unfamthar voices. Peter tip- toed halfway down the stairs and called out, "Bep!"

Once more: "Bep!" His voice was drowned out by the racket in the kitchen. So he ran down to the kitchen while I nervously kept watch from above. "Go upstairs at once, Peter, the accountant's here, you've got to leave!" It was Mr. Kugler's voice. Sighing, Peter came upstairs and closed the bookcase.

Mr. Kugler finally came up at one-thirty. "My gosh, the whole world's turned to strawberries. I had strawber- ries for breakfast, Jan's having diem for lunch, Kleiman's eating them as a snack, Miep's bothng them, Bep's hulling them, and I can smell them everywhere I go. I come upstairs to get away from all that red and what do I see? People washing strawberries!"

The rest of the strawberries were canned. That evening: two jars came unsealed. Father quickly turned them into jam. The next morning: two more lids popped up; and that afternoon: four lids. Mr. van Daan hadn't gotten the jars hot enough when he was sterthzing them, so Father ended up making jam every evening. We ate hot cereal with strawberries, buttermilk with strawberries, bread with strawberries, strawberries for dessert, straw- berries with sugar, strawberries with sand. For two days there was nothing but strawberries, strawberries, strawberries, and then our supply was either exhausted or in jars, safely under lock and key.

"Hey, Anne," Margot called out one day, "Mrs. van Hoeven has let us have some peas, twenty pounds!"

"That's nice of her," I replied. And it certainly was, but it's so much work. . . ugh! 

"On Saturday, you've aJI got to shell peas," Mother announced at the table.

And sure enough, this morning after breakfast our biggest enamel pan appeared on the table, filled to the brim with peas. If you think shelling peas is boring work, you ought to try removing the inner linings. I don't think many people realize that once you've pulled out the linings, the pods are soft, delicious and rich in vitamins. But an even greater advantage is that you get nearly three times as much as when you eat just the peas.

Stripping pods is a precise and meticulous job that might be suited to pedantic dentists or finicky spice experts, but it's a horror for an impatient teenager like me. We started work at nine-thirty; I sat down at ten-thirty, got Up again at eleven, sat down again at eleven-thirty. My ears were humming with the following refrain: snap the end, strip the pod, pull the string, pod in the pan, snap the end, strip the pod, pull the string, pod in the pan, etc., etc. My eyes were swimming: green, green, worm, string, rotten pod, green, green. To fight the boredom and have something to do, I chattered all morn- ing, saying whatever came into my head and making everyone laugh. The monotony was killing me. Every string I pulled made me more certain that I never, ever, want to be just a housewife!

At twelve we finally ate breakfast, but from twelve-thirty to one-fifteen we had to strip pods again. When I stopped, I felt a bit seasick, and so did the others. I napped until four, still in a daze because of those wretched peas.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

SATURDAY, JULY 15,1944

Dearest Kitty,

We've received a book from the library with the challenging title What Do You Think of the Modern Young Girl? I'd like to discuss this subject today.

The writer criticizes "today's youth" from head to toe, though without dismissing them all as "hopeless cases." On the contrary, she believes they have it within their power to build a bigger, better and more beautiful world, but that they occupy themselves with superficial things, without giving a thought to true beauty. In some passages I had the strong feeling that the writer was directing her disapproval at me, which is why I finally want to bare my soul to you and defend myself against this attack.

I have one outstanding character trait that must be obvious to anyone who's known me for any length of time: I have a great deal of self-knowledge. In everything I do, I can watch myself as if I were a stranger. I can stand c across from the everyday Anne and, without being biased or making excuses, watch what she's doing, both the good and the bad. This self-awareness never leaves me, and every time I open my mouth, I think, "You should have said that differently" or "That's fine the way it is." I condemn myself in so many ways that I'm beginning to realize the truth of Father's adage: "Every child has to raise itself." Parents can only advise their children or point them in the right direction. Ultimately, people shape their own characters. In addition, I face life with an extraordinary amount of courage. I feel so strong and capable of bearing burdens, so young and free! When I first realized this, I was glad, because it means I can more easily withstand the blows life has in store.

But I've talked about these things so often. Now I'd like to turn to the chapter "Father and Mother Don't Understand Me." My parents have always spoiled me rotten, treated me kindly, defended me against the van Daans and done all that parents can. And yet for the longest time I've felt extremely lonely, left out, neglected and misunderstood. Father did everything he could to curb my rebellious spirit, but it was no use. I've cured myself by holding my behavior up to the light and looking at what I was doing wrong.

Why didn't Father support me in my struggle? Why did he fall short when he tried to offer me a helping hand? The answer is: he used the wrong methods. He always talked to me as if I were a child going through a difficult phase. It sounds crazy, since Father's the only one who's given me a sense of confidence and made me feel as if I'm a sensible person. But he overlooked one thing: he failed to see that this struggle to triumph over my difficulties was more important to me than anything else. I didn't want to hear about "typical adolescent problems," or "other girls," or "you'll grow out of it." I didn't want to be treated the same as all-the-other-girls, but as Anne-in-her-own-right, and rim didn't understand that. Besides, I can't confide in anyone unless they tell me a lot about themselves, and because I know very little about him, I can't get on a more intimate footing. rim always acts like the elderly father who once had the same fleeting im- pulses, but who can no longer relate to me as a friend, no matter how hard he tries. As a result, I've never shared my outlook on life or my long-pondered theories with anyone but my diary and, once in a while, Margot. I've hid any- thing having to do with me from Father, never shared my ideals with him, deliberately alienated myself from him.

I couldn't have done it any other way. I've let myself be guided entirely by my feelings. It was egotistical, but I've done what was best for my own peace of mind. I would lose that, plus the self-confidence I've worked so hard to achieve, if I were to be subjected to criticism halfway through the job. It may sound hard-hearted, but I can't take criticism from rim either, because not only do I never share my innermost thoughts with him, but I've pushed him even further away by being irritable. 

This is a point I think about quite often: why is it that rim annoys me so much sometimes? I can hardly bear to have him tutor me, and his affection seems forced. I want to be left alone, and I'd rather he ignored me for a while until I'm more sure of myself when I'm talking to him! I'm still torn with guilt about the mean letter I wrote him when I was so upset. Oh, it's hard to be strong and brave in every way!

. . .

Still, this hasn't been my greatest disappointment. No, I think about Peter much more than I do Father. I know very well that he was my conquest, and not the other way around. I created an image of him in my mind, pictured him as a quiet, sweet, sensitive boy badly in need of friendship and love! I needed to pour out my heart to a living person. I wanted a friend who would help me find my way again. I accomplished what I set out to do and drew him, slowly but surely, toward me. When I finally got him to be my friend, it automatically developed into an intimacy that, when I think about it now, seems outrageous. We talked about the most private things, but we haven't yet touched upon the things closest to my heart. I still can't make head or tail of Peter. Is he superficial, or is it shyness that holds him back, even with me? But putting all that aside, I made one mistake: I used intimacy to get closer to him, and in doing so, I ruled out other forms of friendship. He longs to be loved, and I can see he's beginning to like me more with each passing day. Our time together leaves him feeling satisfied, but just makes me want to start all over again. I never broach the subjects I long to bring out into the open. I forced Peter, more than he realizes, to get close to me, and now he's holding on for dear life. I honestly don't see any effective way of shaking him off and getting him back on his own two feet. I soon realized he could never be a kindred spirit, but still tried to help him break out of his narrow world and expand his youthful horizons.

"Deep down, the young are lonelier than the old." I read this in a book somewhere and it's stuck in my mind. As far as I can tell, it's true.

So if you're wondering whether it's harder for the adults here than for the children, the answer is no, it's certainly not. Older people have an opinion about everything and are sure of themselves and their actions. It's twice as hard for us young people to hold on to our opinions at a time when ideals are being shattered and destroyed, when the worst side of human nature predominates, when everyone has come to doubt truth, justice and God.

Anyone who claims that the older folks have a more difficult time in the Annex doesn't realize that the problems have a far greater impact on us. We're much too young to deal with these problems, but they keep thrusting themselves on us until, finally, we're forced to think up a solution, though most of the time our solutions crumble when faced with the facts. It's difficult in times like these: ideals, dreams and cherished hopes rise within us, only to be crushed by grim reality. It's a wonder I haven't abandoned all my ideals, they seem so absurd and impractical. Yet I cling to them because I still believe, in spite of everything, that people are truly good at heart.

It's utterly impossible for me to build my life on a foundation of chaos, suffering and death. I see the world being slowly transformed into a wilderness, I hear the approaching thunder that, one day, will destroy us too, I feel the suffering of millions. And yet, when I look up at the sky, I somehow feel that everything will change for the better, that this cruelty too shall end, that peace and tranquthty will return once more. In the meantime, I must hold on to my ideals. Perhaps the day will come when I'll be able to realize them!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

FRIDAY, JULY 21, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

I'm finally getting optimistic. Now, at last, things are going well! They really are! Great news! An assassination attempt has been made on Hitler's life, and for once not by Jewish Communists or English capitalists, but by a German general who's not only a count, but young as well. The Fuhrer owes his life to "Divine Providence": he escaped, unfortunately, with only a few minor burns and scratches. A number of the officers and generals who were nearby were killed or wounded. The head of the conspiracy has been shot.

This is the best proof we've had so far that many officers and generals are fed up with the war and would like to see Hitler sink into a bottomless pit, so they can establish a mthtary dictatorship, make peace with the Allies, rearm themselves and, after a few decades, start a new war. Perhaps Providence is deliberately biding its time getting rid of Hider, since it's much easier, and cheaper, for the Allies to let the impeccable Germans kill each other off. It's less work for the Russians and the British, and it allows them to start rebuilding their own cities all that much sooner. But we haven't reached that point yet, and I'd hate to anticipate the glorious event. Still, you've probably noticed that I'm telling the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. For once, I'm not rattling on about high ideals.

Furthermore, Hitler has been so kind as to announce to his loyal, devoted people that as of today all mthtary personnel are under orders of the Gestapo, and that any soldier who knows that one of his superiors was involved in this cowardly attempt on the Fuhrer's life may shoot him on sight! 

A fine kettle of fish that will be. Little Johnny's feet are sore after a long march and his commanding officer bawls him out. Johnny grabs his rifle, shouts, "You, you tried to kill the Fuhrer. Take that!" One shot, and the snooty officer who dared to reprimand him passes into eternal life (or is it eternal death?). Eventually, every time an officer sees a soldier or gives an order, he'll be practically wetting his pants, because the soldiers have more say-so than he does.

Were you able to follow that, or have I been skipping from one subject to another again? I can't help it, the prospect of going back to school in October is making me too happy to be logical! Oh dear, didn't I just get through telling you I didn't want to anticipate events? Forgive me, Kitty, they don't call me a bundle of contradictions for nothing!

Yours, Anne M. Frank

TUESDAY, AUGUST 1, 1944

Dearest Kitty,

"A bundle of contradictions" was the end of my previous letter and is the beginning of this one. Can you please tell me exactly what "a bundle of contradictions" is? What does "contradiction" mean? Like so many words, it can be interpreted in two ways: a contradiction imposed from without and one imposed from within. The former means not accepting other people's opinions, always knowing best, having the last word; in short, all those unpleasant traits for which I'm known. The latter, for which I'm not known, is my own secret.

As I've told you many times, I'm split in two. One side contains my exuberant cheerfulness, my flippancy, my joy in life and, above all, my abthty to appreciate the lighter side of things. By that I mean not finding anything wrong with flirtations, a kiss, an embrace, an off-color joke. This side of me is usually lying in wait to ambush the other one, which is much purer, deeper and finer. No one knows Anne's better side, and that's why most people can't stand me. Oh, I can be an amusing clown for an afternoon, but after that everyone's had enough of me to last a month. Actually, I'm what a romantic movie is to a profound thinker -- a mere diversion, a comic interlude, something that is soon forgotten: not bad, but not particularly good either. I hate haVing to tell you this, but why  shouldn't I admit it when I know it's true? My lighter, more superficial side will always steal a march on the deeper side and therefore always win. You can't imagine how often I've tried to p:ush away this Anne, which is only half of what is known as Anne-to beat her down, hide her. But it doesn't work, and I know why.

I'm afraid that people who know me as I usually am will discover I have another side, a better and finer side. I'm afraid they'll mock me, think I'm ridiculous and sentimental and not take me seriously. I'm used to not being taken seriously, but only the "lighthearted" Anne is used to it and can put up with it; the "deeper" Anne is too weak. If I force the good Anne into the spotlight for even fifteen minutes, she shuts up like a clam the moment she's called upon to speak, and lets Anne number one do the talking. Before I realize it, she's disappeared.

So the nice Anne is never seen in company. She's never made a single appearance, though she almost always takes the stage when I'm alone. I know exactly how I'd like to be, how I am . . . on the inside. But unfortunately I'm only like that with myself. And perhaps that's why-no, I'm sure that's the reason why -- I think of myself as happy on the inside and other people think I'm happy on the outside. I'm guided by the pure Anne within, but on the outside I'm nothing but a frolicsome little goat tugging at its tether.

As I've told you, what I say is not what I feel, which is why I have a reputation for being boy-crazy as well as a flirt, a smart aleck and a reader of romances. The happy-go-lucky Anne laughs, gives a flippant reply, shrugs her shoulders and pretends she doesn't give a darn. The quiet Anne reacts in just the opposite way. If I'm being completely honest, I'll have to admit that it does matter to me, that I'm trying very hard to change myself, but that I I'm always up against a more powerful enemy.

A voice within me is sobbing, "You see, that's what's become of you. You're surrounded by negative opinions, dismayed looks and mocking faces, people, who dislike you, and all because you don't listen to the ; advice of your own better half." Believe me, I'd like ;' to listen, but it doesn't work, because if I'm quiet and serious, everyone thinks I'm putting on a new act and I have to save myself with a joke, and then I'm not even talking about my own family, who assume I must be sick, stuff me with aspirins and sedatives, feel my neck and forehead to see if I have a temperature, ask about my bowel movements and berate me for being in a bad mood, until I just can't keep it up anymore, because jj when everybody starts hovering over me, I get cross, then sad, and finally end up turning my heart inside g out, the bad part on the outside and the good part on the inside, and keep trying to find a way to become what I'd like to be and what I could be if . . . if only there were no other people in the world.

Yours, Anne M. Frank

----------------------- 
ANNE'S DIARY ENDS HERE.
-----------------------

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Ethics, by Aristotle
#5 in our series by Aristotle

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: Ethics

Author: Aristotle

Release Date: July, 2005 [EBook #8438]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on July 10, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-Latin-1

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ETHICS ***




Produced by Ted Garvin, David Widger and the DP Team




THE ETHICS OF ARISTOTLE


INTRODUCTION

The _Ethics_ of Aristotle is one half of a single treatise of which his
_Politics_ is the other half. Both deal with one and the same subject.
This subject is what Aristotle calls in one place the "philosophy of
human affairs;" but more frequently Political or Social Science. In the
two works taken together we have their author's whole theory of human
conduct or practical activity, that is, of all human activity which
is not directed merely to knowledge or truth. The two parts of this
treatise are mutually complementary, but in a literary sense each
is independent and self-contained. The proem to the _Ethics_ is an
introduction to the whole subject, not merely to the first part; the
last chapter of the _Ethics_ points forward to the _Politics_, and
sketches for that part of the treatise the order of enquiry to be
pursued (an order which in the actual treatise is not adhered to).

The principle of distribution of the subject-matter between the two
works is far from obvious, and has been much debated. Not much can be
gathered from their titles, which in any case were not given to them by
their author. Nor do these titles suggest any very compact unity in the
works to which they are applied: the plural forms, which survive so
oddly in English (Ethic_s_, Politic_s_), were intended to indicate the
treatment within a single work of a _group_ of connected questions. The
unity of the first group arises from their centring round the topic of
character, that of the second from their connection with the existence
and life of the city or state. We have thus to regard the _Ethics_ as
dealing with one group of problems and the _Politics_ with a second,
both falling within the wide compass of Political Science. Each of these
groups falls into sub-groups which roughly correspond to the several
books in each work. The tendency to take up one by one the various
problems which had suggested themselves in the wide field obscures both
the unity of the subject-matter and its proper articulation. But it is
to be remembered that what is offered us is avowedly rather an enquiry
than an exposition of hard and fast doctrine.

Nevertheless each work aims at a relative completeness, and it is
important to observe the relation of each to the other. The distinction
is not that the one treats of Moral and the other of Political
Philosophy, nor again that the one deals with the moral activity of the
individual and the other with that of the State, nor once more that the
one gives us the theory of human conduct, while the other discusses its
application in practice, though not all of these misinterpretations are
equally erroneous. The clue to the right interpretation is given by
Aristotle himself, where in the last chapter of the _Ethics_ he is
paving the way for the _Politics_. In the _Ethics_ he has not confined
himself to the abstract or isolated individual, but has always thought
of him, or we might say, in his social and political context, with a
given nature due to race and heredity and in certain surroundings.
So viewing him he has studied the nature and formation of his
character--all that he can make himself or be made by others to be.
Especially he has investigated the various admirable forms of human
character and the mode of their production. But all this, though it
brings more clearly before us what goodness or virtue is, and how it is
to be reached, remains mere theory or talk. By itself it does not
enable us to become, or to help others to become, good. For this it is
necessary to bring into play the great force of the Political Community
or State, of which the main instrument is Law. Hence arises the demand
for the necessary complement to the _Ethics, i.e._, a treatise devoted
to the questions which centre round the enquiry; by what organisation
of social or political forces, by what laws or institutions can we best
secure the greatest amount of good character?

We must, however, remember that the production of good character is not
the end of either individual or state action: that is the aim of the one
and the other because good character is the indispensable condition and
chief determinant of happiness, itself the goal of all human doing. The
end of all action, individual or collective, is the greatest happiness
of the greatest number. There is, Aristotle insists, no difference of
kind between the good of one and the good of many or all. The sole
difference is one of amount or scale. This does not mean simply that the
State exists to secure in larger measure the objects of degree which the
isolated individual attempts, but is too feeble, to secure without it.
On the contrary, it rather insists that whatever goods society alone
enables a man to secure have always had to the individual--whether he
realised it or not--the value which, when so secured, he recognises them
to possess. The best and happiest life for the individual is that which
the State renders possible, and this it does mainly by revealing to him
the value of new objects of desire and educating him to appreciate them.
To Aristotle or to Plato the State is, above all, a large and powerful
educative agency which gives the individual increased opportunities of
self-development and greater capacities for the enjoyment of life.

Looking forward, then, to the life of the State as that which aids
support, and combines the efforts of the individual to obtain happiness,
Aristotle draws no hard and fast distinction between the spheres of
action of Man as individual and Man as citizen. Nor does the division of
his discussion into the _Ethics_ and the _Politics_ rest upon any such
distinction. The distinction implied is rather between two stages in the
life of the civilised man--the stage of preparation for the full life of
the adult citizen, and the stage of the actual exercise or enjoyment of
citizenship. Hence the _Ethics_, where his attention is directed upon
the formation of character, is largely and centrally a treatise on Moral
Education. It discusses especially those admirable human qualities which
fit a man for life in an organised civic community, which makes him "a
good citizen," and considers how they can be fostered or created and
their opposites prevented.

This is the kernel of the _Ethics_, and all the rest is subordinate to
this main interest and purpose. Yet "the rest" is not irrelevant; the
whole situation in which character grows and operates is concretely
conceived. There is a basis of what we should call Psychology, sketched
in firm outlines, the deeper presuppositions and the wider issues of
human character and conduct are not ignored, and there is no little of
what we should call Metaphysics. But neither the Psychology nor the
Metaphysics is elaborated, and only so much is brought forward as
appears necessary to put the main facts in their proper perspective
and setting. It is this combination of width of outlook with close
observation of the concrete facts of conduct which gives its abiding
value to the work, and justifies the view of it as containing
Aristotle's Moral Philosophy. Nor is it important merely as summing up
the moral judgments and speculations of an age now long past. It seizes
and dwells upon those elements and features in human practice which are
most essential and permanent, and it is small wonder that so much in it
survives in our own ways of regarding conduct and speaking of it. Thus
it still remains one of the classics of Moral Philosophy, nor is its
value likely soon to be exhausted.

As was pointed out above, the proem (Book I., cc. i-iii.) is a prelude
to the treatment of the whole subject covered by the _Ethics_ and the
_Politics_ together. It sets forth the purpose of the enquiry, describes
the spirit in which it is to be undertaken and what ought to be the
expectation of the reader, and lastly states the necessary conditions
of studying it with profit. The aim of it is the acquisition and
propagation of a certain kind of knowledge (science), but this knowledge
and the thinking which brings it about are subsidiary to a practical
end. The knowledge aimed at is of what is best for man and of the
conditions of its realisation. Such knowledge is that which in its
consumate form we find in great statesmen, enabling them to organise and
administer their states and regulate by law the life of the citizens
to their advantage and happiness, but it is the same kind of knowledge
which on a smaller scale secures success in the management of the family
or of private life.

It is characteristic of such knowledge that it should be deficient
in "exactness," in precision of statement, and closeness of logical
concatenation. We must not look for a mathematics of conduct. The
subject-matter of Human Conduct is not governed by necessary and uniform
laws. But this does not mean that it is subject to no laws. There
are general principles at work in it, and these can be formulated in
"rules," which rules can be systematised or unified. It is all-important
to remember that practical or moral rules are only general and always
admit of exceptions, and that they arise not from the mere complexity
of the facts, but from the liability of the facts to a certain
unpredictable variation. At their very best, practical rules state
probabilities, not certainties; a relative constancy of connection is
all that exists, but it is enough to serve as a guide in life. Aristotle
here holds the balance between a misleading hope of reducing the
subject-matter of conduct to a few simple rigorous abstract principles,
with conclusions necessarily issuing from them, and the view that it is
the field of operation of inscrutable forces acting without predictable
regularity. He does not pretend to find in it absolute uniformities, or
to deduce the details from his principles. Hence, too, he insists on the
necessity of experience as the source or test of all that he has to
say. Moral experience--the actual possession and exercise of good
character--is necessary truly to understand moral principles and
profitably to apply them. The mere intellectual apprehension of them is
not possible, or if possible, profitless.

The _Ethics_ is addressed to students who are presumed both to have
enough general education to appreciate these points, and also to have a
solid foundation of good habits. More than that is not required for the
profitable study of it.

If the discussion of the nature and formation of character be regarded
as the central topic of the _Ethics_, the contents of Book I., cc.
iv.-xii. may be considered as still belonging to the introduction and
setting, but these chapters contain matter of profound importance and
have exercised an enormous influence upon subsequent thought. They lay
down a principle which governs all Greek thought about human life, viz.
that it is only intelligible when viewed as directed towards some end or
good. This is the Greek way of expressing that all human life involves
an ideal element--something which it is not yet and which under certain
conditions it is to be. In that sense Greek Moral Philosophy is
essentially idealistic. Further it is always assumed that all human
practical activity is directed or "oriented" to a _single_ end, and that
that end is knowable or definable in advance of its realisation. To know
it is not merely a matter of speculative interest, it is of the highest
practical moment for only in the light of it can life be duly guided,
and particularly only so can the state be properly organised and
administered. This explains the stress laid throughout by Greek Moral
Philosophy upon the necessity of knowledge as a condition of the best
life. This knowledge is not, though it includes knowledge of the nature
of man and his circumstances, it is knowledge of what is best--of man's
supreme end or good.

But this end is not conceived as presented to him by a superior power
nor even as something which _ought_ to be. The presentation of the Moral
Ideal as Duty is almost absent. From the outset it is identified with
the object of desire, of what we not merely judge desirable but actually
do desire, or that which would, if realised, satisfy human desire. In
fact it is what we all, wise and simple, agree in naming "Happiness"
(Welfare or Well-being)

In what then does happiness consist? Aristotle summarily sets aside the
more or less popular identifications of it with abundance of physical
pleasures, with political power and honour, with the mere possession of
such superior gifts or attainments as normally entitle men to these,
with wealth. None of these can constitute the end or good of man as
such. On the other hand, he rejects his master Plato's conception of a
good which is the end of the whole universe, or at least dismisses it
as irrelevant to his present enquiry. The good towards which all human
desires and practical activities are directed must be one conformable to
man's special nature and circumstances and attainable by his efforts.
There is in Aristotle's theory of human conduct no trace of Plato's
"other worldliness", he brings the moral ideal in Bacon's phrase down to
"right earth"--and so closer to the facts and problems of actual human
living. Turning from criticism of others he states his own positive view
of Happiness, and, though he avowedly states it merely in outline his
account is pregnant with significance. Human Happiness lies in activity
or energising, and that in a way peculiar to man with his given nature
and his given circumstances, it is not theoretical, but practical: it is
the activity not of reason but still of a being who possesses reason and
applies it, and it presupposes in that being the development, and
not merely the natural possession, of certain relevant powers and
capacities. The last is the prime condition of successful living
and therefore of satisfaction, but Aristotle does not ignore other
conditions, such as length of life, wealth and good luck, the absence or
diminution of which render happiness not impossible, but difficult of
attainment.

It is interesting to compare this account of Happiness with Mill's
in _Utilitarianism_. Mill's is much the less consistent: at times
he distinguishes and at times he identifies, happiness, pleasure,
contentment, and satisfaction. He wavers between belief in its general
attainability and an absence of hopefulness. He mixes up in an arbitrary
way such ingredients as "not expecting more from life than it is capable
of bestowing," "mental cultivation," "improved laws," etc., and in fact
leaves the whole conception vague, blurred, and uncertain. Aristotle
draws the outline with a firmer hand and presents a more definite ideal.
He allows for the influence on happiness of conditions only partly, if
at all, within the control of man, but he clearly makes the man positive
determinant of man's happiness he in himself, and more particularly
in what he makes directly of his own nature, and so indirectly of his
circumstances. "'Tis in ourselves that we are thus or thus" But once
more this does not involve an artificial or abstract isolation of the
individual moral agent from his relation to other persons or things from
his context in society and nature, nor ignore the relative dependence of
his life upon a favourable environment.

The main factor which determines success or failure in human life is the
acquisition of certain powers, for Happiness is just the exercise or
putting forth of these in actual living, everything else is secondary
and subordinate. These powers arise from the due development of certain
natural aptitudes which belong (in various degrees) to human nature as
such and therefore to all normal human beings. In their developed
form they are known as virtues (the Greek means simply "goodnesses,"
"perfections," "excellences," or "fitnesses"), some of them are
physical, but others are psychical, and among the latter some, and these
distinctively or peculiarly human, are "rational," _i e_, presuppose the
possession and exercise of mind or intelligence. These last fall into
two groups, which Aristotle distinguishes as Goodnesses of Intellect and
Goodnesses of Character. They have in common that they all excite in us
admiration and praise of their possessors, and that they are not natural
endowments, but acquired characteristics But they differ in important
ways. (1) the former are excellences or developed powers of the
reason as such--of that in us which sees and formulates laws, rules,
regularities systems, and is content in the vision of them, while the
latter involve a submission or obedience to such rules of something
in us which is in itself capricious and irregular, but capable of
regulation, viz our instincts and feelings, (2) the former are acquired
by study and instruction, the latter by discipline. The latter
constitute "character," each of them as a "moral virtue" (literally "a
goodness of character"), and upon them primarily depends the realisation
of happiness. This is the case at least for the great majority of men,
and for all men their possession is an indispensable basis of the
best, _i e_, the most desirable life. They form the chief or central
subject-matter of the _Ethics_.

Perhaps the truest way of conceiving Aristotle's meaning here is to
regard a moral virtue as a form of obedience to a maxim or rule of
conduct accepted by the agent as valid for a class of recurrent
situations in human life. Such obedience requires knowledge of the rule
and acceptance of it _as the rule_ of the agent's own actions, but not
necessarily knowledge of its ground or of its systematic connexion with
other similarly known and similarly accepted rules (It may be remarked
that the Greek word usually translated "reason," means in almost all
cases in the _Ethics_ such a rule, and not the faculty which apprehends,
formulates, considers them).

The "moral virtues and vices" make up what we call character, and the
important questions arise: (1) What is character? and (2) How is it
formed? (for character in this sense is not a natural endowment; it is
formed or produced). Aristotle deals with these questions in the reverse
order. His answers are peculiar and distinctive--not that they are
absolutely novel (for they are anticipated in Plato), but that by him
they are for the first time distinctly and clearly formulated.

(1.) Character, good or bad, is produced by what Aristotle calls
"habituation," that is, it is the result of the repeated doing of acts
which have a similar or common quality. Such repetition acting upon
natural aptitudes or propensities gradually fixes them in one or other
of two opposite directions, giving them a bias towards good or evil.
Hence the several acts which determine goodness or badness of character
must be done in a certain way, and thus the formation of good character
requires discipline and direction from without. Not that the agent
himself contributes nothing to the formation of his character, but that
at first he needs guidance. The point is not so much that the process
cannot be safely left to Nature, but that it cannot be entrusted to
merely intellectual instruction. The process is one of assimilation,
largely by imitation and under direction and control. The result is a
growing understanding of what is done, a choice of it for its own sake,
a fixity and steadiness of purpose. Right acts and feelings become,
through habit, easier and more pleasant, and the doing of them a "second
nature." The agent acquires the power of doing them freely, willingly,
more and more "of himself."

But what are "right" acts? In the first place, they are those that
conform to a rule--to the right rule, and ultimately to reason. The
Greeks never waver from the conviction that in the end moral conduct is
essentially reasonable conduct. But there is a more significant way of
describing their "rightness," and here for the first time Aristotle
introduces his famous "Doctrine of the Mean." Reasoning from the analogy
of "right" physical acts, he pronounces that rightness always means
adaptation or adjustment to the special requirements of a situation. To
this adjustment he gives a quantitative interpretation. To do (or to
feel) what is right in a given situation is to do or to feel just the
amount required--neither more nor less: to do wrong is to do or to
feel too much or too little--to fall short of or over-shoot, "a mean"
determined by the situation. The repetition of acts which lie in the
mean is the cause of the formation of each and every "goodness of
character," and for this "rules" can be given.

(2) What then is a "moral virtue," the result of such a process duly
directed? It is no mere mood of feeling, no mere liability to emotion,
no mere natural aptitude or endowment, it is a permanent _state_ of the
agent's self, or, as we might in modern phrase put it, of his will,
it consists in a steady self-imposed obedience to a rule of action
in certain situations which frequently recur in human life. The rule
prescribes the control and regulation within limits of the agent's
natural impulses to act and feel thus and thus. The situations fall into
groups which constitute the "fields" of the several "moral virtues",
for each there is a rule, conformity to which secures rightness in
the individual acts. Thus the moral ideal appears as a code of
rules, accepted by the agent, but as yet _to him_ without rational
justification and without system or unity. But the rules prescribe no
mechanical uniformity: each within its limits permits variety, and the
exactly right amount adopted to the requirements of the individual
situation (and every actual situation is individual) must be determined
by the intuition of the moment. There is no attempt to reduce the rich
possibilities of right action to a single monotonous type. On the
contrary, there are acknowledged to be many forms of moral virtue, and
there is a long list of them, with their correlative vices enumerated.

The Doctrine of the Mean here takes a form in which it has impressed
subsequent thinkers, but which has less importance than is usually
ascribed to it. In the "Table of the Virtues and Vices," each of the
virtues is flanked by two opposite vices, which are respectively the
excess and defect of that which in due measure constitutes the virtue.
Aristotle tries to show that this is the case in regard to every virtue
named and recognised as such, but his treatment is often forced and the
endeavour is not very successful. Except as a convenient principle
of arrangement of the various forms of praiseworthy or blameworthy
characters, generally acknowledged as such by Greek opinion, this form
of the doctrine is of no great significance.

Books III-V are occupied with a survey of the moral virtues and vices.
These seem to have been undertaken in order to verify in detail the
general account, but this aim is not kept steadily in view. Nor is there
any well-considered principle of classification. What we find is a sort
of portrait-gallery of the various types of moral excellence which
the Greeks of the author's age admired and strove to encourage. The
discussion is full of acute, interesting and sometimes profound
observations. Some of the types are those which are and will be admired
at all times, but others are connected with peculiar features of Greek
life which have now passed away. The most important is that of Justice
or the Just Man, to which we may later return. But the discussion is
preceded by an attempt to elucidate some difficult and obscure points in
the general account of moral virtue and action (Book III, cc i-v). This
section is concerned with the notion of Responsibility. The discussion
designedly excludes what we may call the metaphysical issues of the
problem, which here present themselves, it moves on the level of thought
of the practical man, the statesman, and the legislator. Coercion and
ignorance of relevant circumstances render acts involuntary and exempt
their doer from responsibility, otherwise the act is voluntary and the
agent responsible, choice or preference of what is done, and inner
consent to the deed, are to be presumed. Neither passion nor ignorance
of the right rule can extenuate responsibility. But there is a
difference between acts done voluntarily and acts done of _set_ choice
or purpose. The latter imply Deliberation. Deliberation involves
thinking, thinking out means to ends: in deliberate acts the whole
nature of the agent consents to and enters into the act, and in a
peculiar sense they are his, they _are_ him in action, and the most
significant evidence of what he is. Aristotle is unable wholly to avoid
allusion to the metaphysical difficulties and what he does here say upon
them is obscure and unsatisfactory. But he insists upon the importance
in moral action of the agent's inner consent, and on the reality of his
individual responsibility. For his present purpose the metaphysical
difficulties are irrelevant.

The treatment of Justice in Book V has always been a source of great
difficulty to students of the _Ethics_. Almost more than any other part
of the work it has exercised influence upon mediaeval and modern thought
upon the subject. The distinctions and divisions have become part of the
stock-in-trade of would be philosophic jurists. And yet, oddly enough,
most of these distinctions have been misunderstood and the whole purport
of the discussion misconceived. Aristotle is here dealing with justice
in a restricted sense viz as that special goodness of character which
is required of every adult citizen and which can be produced by early
discipline or habituation. It is the temper or habitual attitude
demanded of the citizen for the due exercise of his functions as taking
part in the administration of the civic community--as a member of the
judicature and executive. The Greek citizen was only exceptionally, and
at rare intervals if ever, a law-maker while at any moment he might
be called upon to act as a judge (juryman or arbitrator) or as an
administrator. For the work of a legislator far more than the moral
virtue of justice or fairmindedness was necessary, these were requisite
to the rarer and higher "intellectual virtue" of practical wisdom. Then
here, too, the discussion moves on a low level, and the raising of
fundamental problems is excluded. Hence "distributive justice" is
concerned not with the large question of the distribution of political
power and privileges among the constituent members or classes of the
state but with the smaller questions of the distribution among those of
casual gains and even with the division among private claimants of a
common fund or inheritance, while "corrective justice" is concerned
solely with the management of legal redress. The whole treatment is
confused by the unhappy attempt to give a precise mathematical form to
the principles of justice in the various fields distinguished. Still it
remains an interesting first endeavour to give greater exactness to some
of the leading conceptions of jurisprudence.

Book VI appears to have in view two aims: (1) to describe goodness of
intellect and discover its highest form or forms; (2) to show how this
is related to goodness of character, and so to conduct generally. As all
thinking is either theoretical or practical, goodness of intellect has
_two_ supreme forms--Theoretical and Practical Wisdom. The first, which
apprehends the eternal laws of the universe, has no direct relation to
human conduct: the second is identical with that master science of human
life of which the whole treatise, consisting of the _Ethics_ and the
_Politics_, is an exposition. It is this science which supplies the
right rules of conduct Taking them as they emerge in and from practical
experience, it formulates them more precisely and organises them into a
system where they are all seen to converge upon happiness. The mode in
which such knowledge manifests itself is in the power to show that such
and such rules of action follow from the very nature of the end or good
for man. It presupposes and starts from a clear conception of the end
and the wish for it as conceived, and it proceeds by a deduction which
is dehberation writ large. In the man of practical wisdom this process
has reached its perfect result, and the code of right rules is
apprehended as a system with a single principle and so as something
wholly rational or reasonable He has not on each occasion to seek and
find the right rule applicable to the situation, he produces it at
once from within himself, and can at need justify it by exhibiting its
rationale, _i.e._ , its connection with the end. This is the consummate
form of reason applied to conduct, but there are minor forms of it, less
independent or original, but nevertheless of great value, such as the
power to think out the proper cause of policy in novel circumstances or
the power to see the proper line of treatment to follow in a court of
law.

The form of the thinking which enters into conduct is that which
terminates in the production of a rule which declares some means to the
end of life. The process presupposes _(a)_ a clear and just apprehension
of the nature of that end--such as the _Ethics_ itself endeavours to
supply; _(b)_ a correct perception of the conditions of action, _(a)_ at
least is impossible except to a man whose character has been duly formed
by discipline; it arises only in a man who has acquired moral virtue.
For such action and feeling as forms bad character, blinds the eye of
the soul and corrupts the moral principle, and the place of practical
wisdom is taken by that parody of itself which Aristotle calls
"cleverness"--the "wisdom" of the unscrupulous man of the world. Thus
true practical wisdom and true goodness of character are interdependent;
neither is genuinely possible or "completely" present without the other.
This is Aristotle's contribution to the discussion of the question, so
central in Greek Moral Philosophy, of the relation of the intellectual
and the passionate factors in conduct.

Aristotle is not an intuitionist, but he recognises the implication in
conduct of a direct and immediate apprehension both of the end and of
the character of his circumstances under which it is from moment to
moment realised. The directness of such apprehension makes it analogous
to sensation or sense-perception; but it is on his view in the end due
to the existence or activity in man of that power in him which is the
highest thing in his nature, and akin to or identical with the divine
nature--mind, or intelligence. It is this which reveals to us what is
best for us--the ideal of a happiness which is the object of our real
wish and the goal of all our efforts. But beyond and above the practical
ideal of what is best _for man_ begins to show itself another and still
higher ideal--that of a life not distinctively human or in a narrow
sense practical, yet capable of being participated in by man even under
the actual circumstances of this world. For a time, however, this
further and higher ideal is ignored.

The next book (Book VII.), is concerned partly with moral conditions, in
which the agent seems to rise above the level of moral virtue or fall
below that of moral vice, but partly and more largely with conditions in
which the agent occupies a middle position between the two. Aristotle's
attention is here directed chiefly towards the phenomena of
"Incontinence," weakness of will or imperfect self-control. This
condition was to the Greeks a matter of only too frequent experience,
but it appeared to them peculiarly difficult to understand. How can a
man know what is good or best for him, and yet chronically fail to act
upon his knowledge? Socrates was driven to the paradox of denying the
possibility, but the facts are too strong for him. Knowledge of the
right rule may be present, nay the rightfulness of its authority may be
acknowledged, and yet time after time it may be disobeyed; the will may
be good and yet overmastered by the force of desire, so that the act
done is contrary to the agent's will. Nevertheless the act may be the
agent's, and the will therefore divided against itself. Aristotle is
aware of the seriousness and difficulty of the problem, but in spite of
the vividness with which he pictures, and the acuteness with which he
analyses, the situation in which such action occurs, it cannot be said
that he solves the problem. It is time that he rises above the abstract
view of it as a conflict between reason and passion, recognising that
passion is involved in the knowledge which in conduct prevails or is
overborne, and that the force which leads to the wrong act is not blind
or ignorant passion, but always has some reason in it. But he tends to
lapse back into the abstraction, and his final account is perplexed and
obscure. He finds the source of the phenomenon in the nature of the
desire for bodily pleasures, which is not irrational but has something
rational in it. Such pleasures are not necessarily or inherently bad, as
has sometimes been maintained; on the contrary, they are good, but only
in certain amounts or under certain conditions, so that the will is
often misled, hesitates, and is lost.

Books VIII. and IX. (on Friendship) are almost an interruption of the
argument. The subject-matter of them was a favourite topic of ancient
writers, and the treatment is smoother and more orderly than elsewhere
in the _Ethics_. The argument is clear, and may be left without
comment to the readers. These books contain a necessary and attractive
complement to the somewhat dry account of Greek morality in the
preceding books, and there are in them profound reflections on what may
be called the metaphysics of friendship or love.

At the beginning of Book X. we return to the topic of Pleasure, which
is now regarded from a different point of view. In Book VII. the
antagonists were those who over-emphasised the irrationality or badness
of Pleasure: here it is rather those who so exaggerate its value as to
confuse or identify it with the good or Happiness. But there is offered
us in this section much more than criticism of the errors of others.
Answers are given both to the psychological question, "What is
Pleasure?" and to the ethical question, "What is its value?" Pleasure,
we are told, is the natural concomitant and index of perfect activity,
distinguishable but inseparable from it--"the activity of a subject at
its best acting upon an object at its best." It is therefore always
and in itself a good, but its value rises and falls with that of the
activity with which it is conjoined, and which it intensifies and
perfects. Hence it follows that the highest and best pleasures are those
which accompany the highest and best activity.

Pleasure is, therefore, a necessary element in the best life, but it is
not the whole of it nor the principal ingredient. The value of a life
depends upon the nature and worth of the activity which it involves;
given the maximum of full free action, the maximum of pleasure necessary
follows. But on what sort of life is such activity possible? This leads
us back to the question, What is happiness? In what life can man find
the fullest satisfaction for his desires? To this question Aristotle
gives an answer which cannot but surprise us after what has preceded.
True Happiness, great satisfaction, cannot be found by man in any form
of "practical" life, no, not in the fullest and freest exercise possible
of the "moral virtues," not in the life of the citizen or of the
great soldier or statesman. To seek it there is to court failure and
disappointment. It is to be found in the life of the onlooker, the
disinterested spectator; or, to put it more distinctly, "in the life of
the philosopher, the life of scientific and philosophic contemplation."
The highest and most satisfying form of life possible to man is "the
contemplative life"; it is only in a secondary sense and for those
incapable of their life, that the practical or moral ideal is the best.
It is time that such a life is not distinctively human, but it is the
privilege of man to partake in it, and such participation, at however
rare intervals and for however short a period, is the highest Happiness
which human life can offer. All other activities have value only because
and in so far as they render _this_ life possible.

But it must not be forgotten that Aristotle conceives of this life as
one of intense activity or energising: it is just this which gives it
its supremacy. In spite of the almost religious fervour with which he
speaks of it ("the most orthodox of his disciples" paraphrases his
meaning by describing its content as "the service and vision of God"),
it is clear that he identified it with the life of the philosopher, as
he understood it, a life of ceaseless intellectual activity in which at
least at times all the distractions and disturbances inseparable from
practical life seemed to disappear and become as nothing. This ideal was
partly an inheritance from the more ardent idealism of his master Plato,
but partly it was the expression of personal experience.

The nobility of this ideal cannot be questioned; the conception of the
end of man or a life lived for truth--of a life blissfully absorbed in
the vision of truth--is a lofty and inspiring one. But we cannot resist
certain criticisms upon its presentation by Aristotle: (1) the relation
of it to the lower ideal of practice is left somewhat obscure; (2) it is
described in such a way as renders its realisation possible only to a
gifted few, and under exceptional circumstances; (3) it seems in various
ways, as regards its content, to be unnecessarily and unjustifiably
limited. But it must be borne in mind that this is a first endeavour to
determine its principle, and that similar failures have attended the
attempts to describe the "religious" or the "spiritual" ideals of
life, which have continually been suggested by the apparently inherent
limitations of the "practical" or "moral" life, which is the subject of
Moral Philosophy.

The Moral Ideal to those who have most deeply reflected on it leads
to the thought of an Ideal beyond and above it, which alone gives it
meaning, but which seems to escape from definite conception by man.
The richness and variety of this Ideal ceaselessly invite, but as
ceaselessly defy, our attempts to imprison it in a definite formula or
portray it in detailed imagination. Yet the thought of it is and remains
inexpungable from our minds.

This conception of the best life is not forgotten in the _Politics_ The
end of life in the state is itself well-living and well-doing--a life
which helps to produce the best life The great agency in the production
of such life is the State operating through Law, which is Reason backed
by Force. For its greatest efficiency there is required the development
of a science of legislation. The main drift of what he says here is that
the most desirable thing would be that the best reason of the community
should be embodied in its laws. But so far as that is not possible, it
still is true that anyone who would make himself and others better must
become a miniature legislator--must study the general principles of law,
morality, and education. The conception of [Grek: politikae] with which
he opened the _Ethics_ would serve as a guide to a father educating his
children as well as to the legislator legislating for the state. Finding
in his predecessors no developed doctrine on this subject, Aristotle
proposes himself to undertake the construction of it, and sketches in
advance the programme of the _Politics_ in the concluding sentence of
the _Ethics_ His ultimate object is to answer the questions, What is the
best form of Polity, how should each be constituted, and what laws and
customs should it adopt and employ? Not till this answer is given will
"the philosophy of human affairs" be complete.

On looking back it will be seen that the discussion of the central topic
of the nature and formation of character has expanded into a Philosophy
of Human Conduct, merging at its beginning and end into metaphysics
The result is a Moral Philosophy set against a background of Political
Theory and general Philosophy. The most characteristic features of this
Moral Philosophy are due to the fact of its essentially teleological
view of human life and action: (1) Every human activity, but especially
every human practical activity, is directed towards a simple End
discoverable by reflection, and this End is conceived of as the object
of universal human desire, as something to be enjoyed, not as something
which ought to be done or enacted. Anstotle's Moral Philosophy is not
hedonistic but it is eud\E6momstic, the end is the enjoyment of Happiness,
not the fulfilment of Duty. (2) Every human practical activity derives
its value from its efficiency as a means to that end, it is good or bad,
right or wrong, as it conduces or fails to conduce to Happiness Thus his
Moral Philosophy is essentially utilitarian or prudential Right action
presupposes Thought or Thinking, partly on the development of a clearer
and distincter conception of the end of desire, partly as the deduction
from that of rules which state the normally effective conditions of
its realisation. The thinking involved in right conduct is
calculation--calculation of means to an end fixed by nature and
foreknowable Action itself is at its best just the realisation of a
scheme preconceived and thought out beforehand, commending itself by its
inherent attractiveness or promise of enjoyment.

This view has the great advantage of exhibiting morality as essentially
reasonable, but the accompanying disadvantage of lowering it into a
somewhat prosaic and unideal Prudentialism, nor is it saved from this
by the tacking on to it, by a sort of after-thought, of the second and
higher Ideal--an addition which ruins the coherence of the account
without really transmuting its substance The source of our
dissatisfaction with the whole theory lies deeper than in its tendency
to identify the end with the maximum of enjoyment or satisfaction, or to
regard the goodness or badness of acts and feelings as lying solely in
their efficacy to produce such a result It arises from the application
to morality of the distinction of means and end For this distinction,
for all its plausibility and usefulness in ordinary thought and speech,
cannot finally be maintained In morality--and this is vital to its
character--everything is both means and end, and so neither in
distinction or separation, and all thinking about it which presupposes
the finality of this distinction wanders into misconception and error.
The thinking which really matters in conduct is not a thinking which
imaginatively forecasts ideals which promise to fulfil desire, or
calculates means to their attainment--that is sometimes useful,
sometimes harmful, and always subordinate, but thinking which reveals
to the agent the situation in which he is to act, both, that is, the
universal situation on which as man he always and everywhere stands,
and the ever-varying and ever-novel situation in which he as this
individual, here and now, finds himself. In such knowledge of given
or historic fact lie the natural determinants of his conduct, in such
knowledge alone lies the condition of his freedom and his good.

But this does not mean that Moral Philosophy has not still much to
learn from Aristotle's _Ethics_. The work still remains one of the best
introductions to a study of its important subject-matter, it spreads
before us a view of the relevant facts, it reduces them to manageable
compass and order, it raises some of the central problems, and makes
acute and valuable suggestions towards their solution. Above all, it
perpetually incites to renewed and independent reflection upon them.

J. A. SMITH


  The following is a list of the works of Aristotle:--

  First edition of works (with omission of Rhetorica, Poetica, and
  second book of Economica), 5 vols by Aldus Manutius, Venice, 1495 8,
  re impression supervised by Erasmus and with certain corrections by
  Grynaeus (including Rhetorica and Poetica), 1531, 1539, revised 1550,
  later editions were followed by that of Immanuel Bekker and Brandis
  (Greek and Latin), 5 vols. The 5th vol contains the Index by Bomtz,
  1831-70, Didot edition (Greek and Latin), 5 vols 1848 74

  ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS Edited by T Taylor, with Porphyry's
  Introduction, 9 vols, 1812, under editorship of J A Smith and
  W D Ross, II vols, 1908-31, Loeb editions Ethica, Rhetorica,
  Poetica, Physica, Politica, Metaphysica, 1926-33

  Later editions of separate works
  _De Anima_ Torstrik, 1862, Trendelenburg, 2nd edition, 1877,
  with English translation, L Wallace, 1882, Biehl, 1884, 1896, with
  English, R D Hicks, 1907
_Ethica_ J S Brewer (Nicomachean), 1836, W E Jelf, 1856, J F T Rogers,
1865, A Grant, 1857 8, 1866, 1874, 1885, E Moore, 1871, 1878, 4th
edition, 1890, Ramsauer (Nicomachean), 1878, Susemihl, 1878, 1880,
revised by O Apelt, 1903, A Grant, 1885, I Bywater (Nicomachean), 1890,
J Burnet, 1900

_Historia Animalium_ Schneider, 1812, Aubert and Wimmer, 1860;
Dittmeyer, 1907

_Metaphysica_ Schwegler, 1848, W Christ, 1899

_Organon_ Waitz, 1844 6

_Poetica_ Vahlen, 1867, 1874, with Notes by E Moore, 1875, with English
translation by E R Wharton, 1883, 1885, Uberweg, 1870, 1875, with
German translation, Susemihl, 1874, Schmidt, 1875, Christ, 1878, I
Bywater, 1898, T G Tucker, 1899

_De Republica Athenientium_ Text and facsimile of Papyrus, F G Kenyon,
1891, 3rd edition, 1892, Kaibel and Wilamowitz-Moellendorf, 1891, 3rd
edition, 1898, Van Herwerden and Leeuwen (from Kenyon's text), 1891,
Blass, 1892, 1895, 1898, 1903, J E Sandys, 1893

_Politica_ Susemihl, 1872, with German, 1878, 3rd edition, 1882,
Susemihl and Hicks, 1894, etc, O Immisch, 1909

_Physica_ C Prantl, 1879

_Rhetorica_ Stahr, 1862, Sprengel (with Latin text), 1867, Cope and
Sandys, 1877, Roemer, 1885, 1898

ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS OF ONE OR MORE WORKS De Anima (with Parva
Naturalia), by W A Hammond, 1902 Ethica Of Morals to Nicomachus, by
E Pargiter, 1745, with Politica by J Gillies, 1797, 1804, 1813, with
Rhetorica and Poetica, by T Taylor, 1818, and later editions Nicomachean
Ethics, 1819, mainly from text of Bekker by D P Chase, 1847, revised
1861, and later editions, with an introductory essay by G H Lewes
(Camelot Classics) 1890, re-edited by J M Mitchell (New Universal
Library), 1906, 1910, by R W Browne (Bohn's Classical Library),
1848, etc, by R Williams, 1869, 1876, by W M Hatch and others (with
translation of paraphrase attributed to Andronicus of Rhodes), edited
by E Hatch, 1879 by F H Peters, 1881, J E C Welldon, 1892, J Gillies
(Lubbock's Hundred Books) 1893 Historia Animalium, by R Creswell (Bonn's
Classical Library) 1848, with Treatise on Physiognomy, by T Taylor,
1809 Metaphysica, by T Taylor, 1801, by J H M Mahon (Bohn's Classical
Library), 1848 Organon, with Porphyry's Introduction, by O F Owen
(Bohn's Classical Library), 1848 Posterior Analytics, E Poste, 1850, E S
Bourchier, 1901, On Fallacies, E Poste, 1866 Parva Naturaha (Greek and
English), by G R T Ross, 1906, with De Anima, by W A Hammond, 1902 Youth
and Old Age, Life and Death and Respiration, W Ogle 1897 Poetica, with
Notes from the French of D Acier, 1705, by H J Pye, 1788, 1792, T
Twining, 1789, 1812, with Preface and Notes by H Hamilton, 1851,
Treatise on Rhetorica and Poetica, by T Hobbes (Bohn's Classical
Library), 1850, by Wharton, 1883 (see Greek version), S H Butcher, 1895,
1898, 3rd edition, 1902, E S Bourchier, 1907, by Ingram Bywater, 1909 De
Partibus Animalium, W Ogle, 1882 De Republica Athenientium, by E Poste,
1891, F G Kenyon, 1891, T J Dymes, 1891 De Virtutibus et Vitus, by W
Bridgman, 1804 Politica, from the French of Regius, 1598, by W Ellis,
1776, 1778, 1888 (Morley's Universal Library), 1893 (Lubbock's Hundred
Books) by E Walford (with \C6conomics, and Life by Dr Gillies), (Bohn's
Classical Library), 1848, J E. C. Welldon, 1883, B Jowett, 1885, with
Introduction and Index by H W C Davis, 1905, Books i iii iv (vii)
from Bekker's text by W E Bolland, with Introduction by A Lang, 1877.
Problemata (with writings of other philosophers), 1597, 1607, 1680,
1684, etc. Rhetorica, A summary by T Hobbes, 1655 (?), new edition,
1759, by the translators of the Art of Thinking, 1686, 1816, by D M
Crimmin, 1812, J Gillies, 1823, Anon 1847, J E C Welldon, 1886, R C
Jebb, with Introduction and Supplementary Notes by J E Sandys, 1909 (see
under Poetica and Ethica). Secreta Secretorum (supposititious work),
Anon 1702, from the Hebrew version by M Gaster, 1907, 1908. Version by
Lydgate and Burgh, edited by R Steele (E E T S), 1894, 1898.

LIFE, ETC J W Blakesley, 1839, A Crichton (Jardine's Naturalist's
Library), 1843, JS Blackie, Four Phases of Morals, Socrates, Aristotle,
etc, 1871, G Grote, Aristotle, edited by A Bain and G C Robertson, 1872,
1880, E Wallace, Outlines of the Philosophy of Aristotle, 1875, 1880,
A Grant (Ancient Classics for English readers), 1877, T Davidson,
Aristotle and Ancient Educational Ideals (Great Educators), 1892, F
Sewall, Swedenborg and Aristotle, 1895, W A Heidel, The Necessary
and the Contingent of the Aristotelian System (University of Chicago
Contributions to Philosophy), 1896, F W Bain, On the Realisation of the
Possible, and the Spirit of Aristotle, 1899, J H Hyslop, The Ethics of
the Greek Philosophers, etc (Evolution of Ethics), 1903, M V Williams,
Six Essays on the Platonic Theory of Knowledge as expounded in the later
dialogues and reviewed by Aristotle, 1908, J M Watson, Aristotle's
Criticism of Plato, 1909 A E Taylor, Aristotle, 1919, W D Ross,
Aristotle, 1923.




ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS




BOOK I


Every art, and every science reduced to a teachable form, and in like
manner every action and moral choice, aims, it is thought, at some good:
for which reason a common and by no means a bad description of the Chief
Good is, "that which all things aim at."

Now there plainly is a difference in the Ends proposed: for in some
cases they are acts of working, and in others certain works or tangible
results beyond and beside the acts of working: and where there are
certain Ends beyond and beside the actions, the works are in their
nature better than the acts of working. Again, since actions and arts
and sciences are many, the Ends likewise come to be many: of the healing
art, for instance, health; of the ship-building art, a vessel; of
the military art, victory; and of domestic management, wealth; are
respectively the Ends.

And whatever of such actions, arts, or sciences range under some one
faculty (as under that of horsemanship the art of making bridles, and
all that are connected with the manufacture of horse-furniture in
general; this itself again, and every action connected with war, under
the military art; and in the same way others under others), in all such,
the Ends of the master-arts are more choice-worthy than those ranging
under them, because it is with a view to the former that the latter are
pursued.

(And in this comparison it makes no difference whether the acts of
working are themselves the Ends of the actions, or something further
beside them, as is the case in the arts and sciences we have been just
speaking of.)

[Sidenote: II] Since then of all things which may be done there is some
one End which we desire for its own sake, and with a view to which we
desire everything else; and since we do not choose in all instances with
a further End in view (for then men would go on without limit, and so
the desire would be unsatisfied and fruitless), this plainly must be the
Chief Good, _i.e._ the best thing of all.

Surely then, even with reference to actual life and conduct, the
knowledge of it must have great weight; and like archers, with a mark in
view, we shall be more likely to hit upon what is right: and if so, we
ought to try to describe, in outline at least, what it is and of which
of the sciences and faculties it is the End.

[Sidenote: 1094b] Now one would naturally suppose it to be the End
of that which is most commanding and most inclusive: and to this
description, [Greek: _politikae_] plainly answers: for this it is that
determines which of the sciences should be in the communities, and which
kind individuals are to learn, and what degree of proficiency is to be
required. Again; we see also ranging under this the most highly esteemed
faculties, such as the art military, and that of domestic management,
and Rhetoric. Well then, since this uses all the other practical
sciences, and moreover lays down rules as to what men are to do, and
from what to abstain, the End of this must include the Ends of the rest,
and so must be _The Good_ of Man. And grant that this is the same to
the individual and to the community, yet surely that of the latter is
plainly greater and more perfect to discover and preserve: for to do
this even for a single individual were a matter for contentment; but to
do it for a whole nation, and for communities generally, were more noble
and godlike.


[Sidenote: III] Such then are the objects proposed by our treatise,
which is of the nature of [Greek: _politikae_]: and I conceive I shall
have spoken on them satisfactorily, if they be made as distinctly clear
as the nature of the subject-matter will admit: for exactness must not
be looked for in all discussions alike, any more than in all works
of handicraft. Now the notions of nobleness and justice, with the
examination of which _politikea_ is concerned, admit of variation
and error to such a degree, that they are supposed by some to exist
conventionally only, and not in the nature of things: but then, again,
the things which are allowed to be goods admit of a similar error,
because harm cornes to many from them: for before now some have perished
through wealth, and others through valour.

We must be content then, in speaking of such things and from such data,
to set forth the truth roughly and in outline; in other words, since
we are speaking of general matter and from general data, to draw also
conclusions merely general. And in the same spirit should each person
receive what we say: for the man of education will seek exactness so far
in each subject as the nature of the thing admits, it being plainly much
the same absurdity to put up with a mathematician who tries to persuade
instead of proving, and to demand strict demonstrative reasoning of a
Rhetorician.

[Sidenote: 1095a] Now each man judges well what he knows, and of these
things he is a good judge: on each particular matter then he is a good
judge who has been instructed in _it_, and in a general way the man of
general mental cultivation.

Hence the young man is not a fit student of Moral Philosophy, for he has
no experience in the actions of life, while all that is said presupposes
and is concerned with these: and in the next place, since he is apt to
follow the impulses of his passions, he will hear as though he heard
not, and to no profit, the end in view being practice and not mere
knowledge.

And I draw no distinction between young in years, and youthful in temper
and disposition: the defect to which I allude being no direct result of
the time, but of living at the beck and call of passion, and following
each object as it rises. For to them that are such the knowledge comes
to be unprofitable, as to those of imperfect self-control: but, to
those who form their desires and act in accordance with reason, to have
knowledge on these points must be very profitable.

Let thus much suffice by way of preface on these three points, the
student, the spirit in which our observations should be received, and
the object which we propose.

[Sidenote: IV] And now, resuming the statement with which we commenced,
since all knowledge and moral choice grasps at good of some kind or
another, what good is that which we say [Greek: _politikai_] aims at?
or, in other words, what is the highest of all the goods which are the
objects of action?

So far as name goes, there is a pretty general agreement: for HAPPINESS
both the multitude and the refined few call it, and "living well" and
"doing well" they conceive to be the same with "being happy;" but about
the Nature of this Happiness, men dispute, and the multitude do not in
their account of it agree with the wise. For some say it is some one of
those things which are palpable and apparent, as pleasure or wealth or
honour; in fact, some one thing, some another; nay, oftentimes the same
man gives a different account of it; for when ill, he calls it health;
when poor, wealth: and conscious of their own ignorance, men admire
those who talk grandly and above their comprehension. Some again held it
to be something by itself, other than and beside these many good things,
which is in fact to all these the cause of their being good.

Now to sift all the opinions would be perhaps rather a fruitless task;
so it shall suffice to sift those which are most generally current, or
are thought to have some reason in them.

[Sidenote: 1095b] And here we must not forget the difference between
reasoning from principles, and reasoning to principles: for with good
cause did Plato too doubt about this, and inquire whether the right road
is from principles or to principles, just as in the racecourse from the
judges to the further end, or _vice vers\E2_.

Of course, we must begin with what is known; but then this is of two
kinds, what we _do_ know, and what we _may_ know: perhaps then as
individuals we must begin with what we _do_ know. Hence the necessity
that he should have been well trained in habits, who is to study, with
any tolerable chance of profit, the principles of nobleness and justice
and moral philosophy generally. For a principle is a matter of fact,
and if the fact is sufficiently clear to a man there will be no need in
addition of the reason for the fact. And he that has been thus trained
either has principles already, or can receive them easily: as for him
who neither has nor can receive them, let him hear his sentence from
Hesiod:

  He is best of all who of himself conceiveth all things;
  Good again is he too who can adopt a good suggestion;
  But whoso neither of himself conceiveth nor hearing from
  another
  Layeth it to heart;--he is a useless man.

[Sidenote: V] But to return from this digression.

Now of the Chief Good (_i.e._ of Happiness) men seem to form their
notions from the different modes of life, as we might naturally expect:
the many and most low conceive it to be pleasure, and hence they are
content with the life of sensual enjoyment. For there are three lines of
life which stand out prominently to view: that just mentioned, and the
life in society, and, thirdly, the life of contemplation.

Now the many are plainly quite slavish, choosing a life like that of
brute animals: yet they obtain some consideration, because many of the
great share the tastes of Sardanapalus. The refined and active again
conceive it to be honour: for this may be said to be the end of the life
in society: yet it is plainly too superficial for the object of our
search, because it is thought to rest with those who pay rather than
with him who receives it, whereas the Chief Good we feel instinctively
must be something which is our own, and not easily to be taken from us.

And besides, men seem to pursue honour, that they may *[Sidenote: 1096a]
believe themselves to be good: for instance, they seek to be honoured
by the wise, and by those among whom they are known, and for virtue:
clearly then, in the opinion at least of these men, virtue is higher
than honour. In truth, one would be much more inclined to think this
to be the end of the life in society; yet this itself is plainly not
sufficiently final: for it is conceived possible, that a man possessed
of virtue might sleep or be inactive all through his life, or, as a
third case, suffer the greatest evils and misfortunes: and the man who
should live thus no one would call happy, except for mere disputation's
sake.

And for these let thus much suffice, for they have been treated of at
sufficient length in my Encyclia.

A third line of life is that of contemplation, concerning which we shall
make our examination in the sequel.

As for the life of money-making, it is one of constraint, and wealth
manifestly is not the good we are seeking, because it is for use, that
is, for the sake of something further: and hence one would rather
conceive the forementioned ends to be the right ones, for men rest
content with them for their own sakes. Yet, clearly, they are not the
objects of our search either, though many words have been wasted on
them. So much then for these.

[Sidenote: VI] Again, the notion of one Universal Good (the same, that
is, in all things), it is better perhaps we should examine, and discuss
the meaning of it, though such an inquiry is unpleasant, because they
are friends of ours who have introduced these [Greek: _eidae_]. Still
perhaps it may appear better, nay to be our duty where the safety of the
truth is concerned, to upset if need be even our own theories, specially
as we are lovers of wisdom: for since both are dear to us, we are bound
to prefer the truth. Now they who invented this doctrine of [Greek:
_eidae_], did not apply it to those things in which they spoke of
priority and posteriority, and so they never made any [Greek: _idea_] of
numbers; but good is predicated in the categories of Substance, Quality,
and Relation; now that which exists of itself, _i.e._ Substance, is
prior in the nature of things to that which is relative, because this
latter is an off-shoot, as it were, and result of that which is; on
their own principle then there cannot be a common [Greek: _idea_] in the
case of these.

In the next place, since good is predicated in as many ways as there are
modes of existence [for it is predicated in the category of Substance,
as God, Intellect--and in that of Quality, as The Virtues--and in that
of Quantity, as The Mean--and in that of Relation, as The Useful--and in
that of Time, as Opportunity--and in that of Place, as Abode; and
other such like things], it manifestly cannot be something common and
universal and one in all: else it would not have been predicated in all
the categories, but in one only.

[Sidenote: 1096b] Thirdly, since those things which range under one
[Greek: _idea_] are also under the cognisance of one science, there
would have been, on their theory, only one science taking cognisance of
all goods collectively: but in fact there are many even for those which
range under one category: for instance, of Opportunity or Seasonableness
(which I have before mentioned as being in the category of Time), the
science is, in war, generalship; in disease, medical science; and of the
Mean (which I quoted before as being in the category of Quantity), in
food, the medical science; and in labour or exercise, the gymnastic
science. A person might fairly doubt also what in the world they mean by
very-this that or the other, since, as they would themselves allow, the
account of the humanity is one and the same in the very-Man, and in any
individual Man: for so far as the individual and the very-Man are both
Man, they will not differ at all: and if so, then very-good and any
particular good will not differ, in so far as both are good. Nor will it
do to say, that the eternity of the very-good makes it to be more good;
for what has lasted white ever so long, is no whiter than what lasts but
for a day.

No. The Pythagoreans do seem to give a more credible account of the
matter, who place "One" among the goods in their double list of goods
and bads: which philosophers, in fact, Speusippus seems to have
followed.

But of these matters let us speak at some other time. Now there is
plainly a loophole to object to what has been advanced, on the plea that
the theory I have attacked is not by its advocates applied to all good:
but those goods only are spoken of as being under one [Greek: idea],
which are pursued, and with which men rest content simply for their own
sakes: whereas those things which have a tendency to produce or preserve
them in any way, or to hinder their contraries, are called good because
of these other goods, and after another fashion. It is manifest then
that the goods may be so called in two senses, the one class for their
own sakes, the other because of these.

Very well then, let us separate the independent goods from the
instrumental, and see whether they are spoken of as under one [Greek:
idea]. But the question next arises, what kind of goods are we to call
independent? All such as are pursued even when separated from other
goods, as, for instance, being wise, seeing, and certain pleasures and
honours (for these, though we do pursue them with some further end in
view, one would still place among the independent goods)? or does it
come in fact to this, that we can call nothing independent good except
the [Greek: idea], and so the concrete of it will be nought?

If, on the other hand, these are independent goods, then we shall
require that the account of the goodness be the same clearly in all,
just as that of the whiteness is in snow and white lead. But how stands
the fact? Why of honour and wisdom and pleasure the accounts are
distinct and different in so far as they are good. The Chief Good then
is not something common, and after one [Greek: idea].

But then, how does the name come to be common (for it is not seemingly a
case of fortuitous equivocation)? Are different individual things called
good by virtue of being from one source, or all conducing to one end, or
rather by way of analogy, for that intellect is to the soul as sight to
the body, and so on? However, perhaps we ought to leave these questions
now, for an accurate investigation of them is more properly the business
of a different philosophy. And likewise respecting the [Greek: idea]:
for even if there is some one good predicated in common of all things
that are good, or separable and capable of existing independently,
manifestly it cannot be the object of human action or attainable by Man;
but we are in search now of something that is so.

It may readily occur to any one, that it would be better to attain a
knowledge of it with a view to such concrete goods as are attainable and
practical, because, with this as a kind of model in our hands, we shall
the better know what things are good for us individually, and when we
know them, we shall attain them.

Some plausibility, it is true, this argument possesses, but it is
contradicted by the facts of the Arts and Sciences; for all these,
though aiming at some good, and seeking that which is deficient, yet
pretermit the knowledge of it: now it is not exactly probable that all
artisans without exception should be ignorant of so great a help as this
would be, and not even look after it; neither is it easy to see wherein
a weaver or a carpenter will be profited in respect of his craft by
knowing the very-good, or how a man will be the more apt to effect cures
or to command an army for having seen the [Greek: idea] itself. For
manifestly it is not health after this general and abstract fashion
which is the subject of the physician's investigation, but the health
of Man, or rather perhaps of this or that man; for he has to heal
individuals.--Thus much on these points.


VII

And now let us revert to the Good of which we are in search: what can it
be? for manifestly it is different in different actions and arts: for it
is different in the healing art and in the art military, and similarly
in the rest. What then is the Chief Good in each? Is it not "that for
the sake of which the other things are done?" and this in the healing
art is health, and in the art military victory, and in that of
house-building a house, and in any other thing something else; in short,
in every action and moral choice the End, because in all cases men do
everything else with a view to this. So that if there is some one End of
all things which are and may be done, this must be the Good proposed by
doing, or if more than one, then these.

Thus our discussion after some traversing about has come to the same
point which we reached before. And this we must try yet more to clear
up.

Now since the ends are plainly many, and of these we choose some with
a view to others (wealth, for instance, musical instruments, and, in
general, all instruments), it is clear that all are not final: but the
Chief Good is manifestly something final; and so, if there is some one
only which is final, this must be the object of our search: but if
several, then the most final of them will be it.

Now that which is an object of pursuit in itself we call more final than
that which is so with a view to something else; that again which is
never an object of choice with a view to something else than those which
are so both in themselves and with a view to this ulterior object: and
so by the term "absolutely final," we denote that which is an object of
choice always in itself, and never with a view to any other.

And of this nature Happiness is mostly thought to be, for this we choose
always for its own sake, and never with a view to anything further:
whereas honour, pleasure, intellect, in fact every excellence we choose
for their own sakes, it is true (because we would choose each of these
even if no result were to follow), but we choose them also with a view
to happiness, conceiving that through their instrumentality we shall be
happy: but no man chooses happiness with a view to them, nor in fact
with a view to any other thing whatsoever.

The same result is seen to follow also from the notion of
self-sufficiency, a quality thought to belong to the final good. Now
by sufficient for Self, we mean not for a single individual living a
solitary life, but for his parents also and children and wife, and,
in general, friends and countrymen; for man is by nature adapted to a
social existence. But of these, of course, some limit must be fixed: for
if one extends it to parents and descendants and friends' friends,
there is no end to it. This point, however, must be left for future
investigation: for the present we define that to be self-sufficient
"which taken alone makes life choice-worthy, and to be in want of
nothing;" now of such kind we think Happiness to be: and further, to
be most choice-worthy of all things; not being reckoned with any other
thing, for if it were so reckoned, it is plain we must then allow it,
with the addition of ever so small a good, to be more choice-worthy than
it was before: because what is put to it becomes an addition of so much
more good, and of goods the greater is ever the more choice-worthy.

So then Happiness is manifestly something final and self-sufficient,
being the end of all things which are and may be done.

But, it may be, to call Happiness the Chief Good is a mere truism, and
what is wanted is some clearer account of its real nature. Now this
object may be easily attained, when we have discovered what is the work
of man; for as in the case of flute-player, statuary, or artisan of any
kind, or, more generally, all who have any work or course of action,
their Chief Good and Excellence is thought to reside in their work, so
it would seem to be with man, if there is any work belonging to him.

Are we then to suppose, that while carpenter and cobbler have certain
works and courses of action, Man as Man has none, but is left by Nature
without a work? or would not one rather hold, that as eye, hand, and
foot, and generally each of his members, has manifestly some special
work; so too the whole Man, as distinct from all these, has some work of
his own?

What then can this be? not mere life, because that plainly is shared
with him even by vegetables, and we want what is peculiar to him. We
must separate off then the life of mere nourishment and growth, and next
will come the life of sensation: but this again manifestly is common to
horses, oxen, and every animal. There remains then a kind of life of
the Rational Nature apt to act: and of this Nature there are two parts
denominated Rational, the one as being obedient to Reason, the other as
having and exerting it. Again, as this life is also spoken of in two
ways, we must take that which is in the way of actual working, because
this is thought to be most properly entitled to the name. If then the
work of Man is a working of the soul in accordance with reason, or at
least not independently of reason, and we say that the work of any given
subject, and of that subject good of its kind, are the same in kind (as,
for instance, of a harp-player and a good harp-player, and so on in
every case, adding to the work eminence in the way of excellence; I
mean, the work of a harp-player is to play the harp, and of a good
harp-player to play it well); if, I say, this is so, and we assume the
work of Man to be life of a certain kind, that is to say a working of
the soul, and actions with reason, and of a good man to do these things
well and nobly, and in fact everything is finished off well in the way
of the excellence which peculiarly belongs to it: if all this is so,
then the Good of Man comes to be "a working of the Soul in the way of
Excellence," or, if Excellence admits of degrees, in the way of the best
and most perfect Excellence.

And we must add, in a complete life; for as it is not one swallow or one
fine day that makes a spring, so it is not one day or a short time that
makes a man blessed and happy.

Let this then be taken for a rough sketch of the Chief Good: since it
is probably the right way to give first the outline, and fill it in
afterwards. And it would seem that any man may improve and connect
what is good in the sketch, and that time is a good discoverer and
co-operator in such matters: it is thus in fact that all improvements
in the various arts have been brought about, for any man may fill up a
deficiency.

You must remember also what has been already stated, and not seek
for exactness in all matters alike, but in each according to the
subject-matter, and so far as properly belongs to the system. The
carpenter and geometrician, for instance, inquire into the right line in
different fashion: the former so far as he wants it for his work, the
latter inquires into its nature and properties, because he is concerned
with the truth.

So then should one do in other matters, that the incidental matters may
not exceed the direct ones.

And again, you must not demand the reason either in all things
alike, because in some it is sufficient that the fact has been well
demonstrated, which is the case with first principles; and the fact is
the first step, _i.e._ starting-point or principle.

And of these first principles some are obtained by induction, some by
perception, some by a course of habituation, others in other different
ways. And we must try to trace up each in their own nature, and take
pains to secure their being well defined, because they have
great influence on what follows: it is thought, I mean, that the
starting-point or principle is more than half the whole matter, and that
many of the points of inquiry come simultaneously into view thereby.


VIII

We must now inquire concerning Happiness, not only from our conclusion
and the data on which our reasoning proceeds, but likewise from what
is commonly said about it: because with what is true all things which
really are are in harmony, but with that which is false the true very
soon jars.

Now there is a common division of goods into three classes; one being
called external, the other two those of the soul and body respectively,
and those belonging to the soul we call most properly and specially
good. Well, in our definition we assume that the actions and workings of
the soul constitute Happiness, and these of course belong to the soul.
And so our account is a good one, at least according to this opinion,
which is of ancient date, and accepted by those who profess philosophy.
Rightly too are certain actions and workings said to be the end, for
thus it is brought into the number of the goods of the soul instead of
the external. Agreeing also with our definition is the common notion,
that the happy man lives well and does well, for it has been stated by
us to be pretty much a kind of living well and doing well.

But further, the points required in Happiness are found in combination
in our account of it.

For some think it is virtue, others practical wisdom, others a kind of
scientific philosophy; others that it is these, or else some one of
them, in combination with pleasure, or at least not independently of it;
while others again take in external prosperity.

Of these opinions, some rest on the authority of numbers or antiquity,
others on that of few, and those men of note: and it is not likely that
either of these classes should be wrong in all points, but be right at
least in some one, or even in most.

Now with those who assert it to be Virtue (Excellence), or some kind of
Virtue, our account agrees: for working in the way of Excellence surely
belongs to Excellence.

And there is perhaps no unimportant difference between conceiving of
the Chief Good as in possession or as in use, in other words, as a mere
state or as a working. For the state or habit may possibly exist in a
subject without effecting any good, as, for instance, in him who is
asleep, or in any other way inactive; but the working cannot so, for it
will of necessity act, and act well. And as at the Olympic games it is
not the finest and strongest men who are crowned, but they who enter the
lists, for out of these the prize-men are selected; so too in life, of
the honourable and the good, it is they who act who rightly win the
prizes.

Their life too is in itself pleasant: for the feeling of pleasure is a
mental sensation, and that is to each pleasant of which he is said to be
fond: a horse, for instance, to him who is fond of horses, and a sight
to him who is fond of sights: and so in like manner just acts to him who
is fond of justice, and more generally the things in accordance with
virtue to him who is fond of virtue. Now in the case of the multitude of
men the things which they individually esteem pleasant clash, because
they are not such by nature, whereas to the lovers of nobleness those
things are pleasant which are such by nature: but the actions in
accordance with virtue are of this kind, so that they are pleasant both
to the individuals and also in themselves.

So then their life has no need of pleasure as a kind of additional
appendage, but involves pleasure in itself. For, besides what I have
just mentioned, a man is not a good man at all who feels no pleasure in
noble actions, just as no one would call that man just who does not feel
pleasure in acting justly, or liberal who does not in liberal actions,
and similarly in the case of the other virtues which might be
enumerated: and if this be so, then the actions in accordance with
virtue must be in themselves pleasurable. Then again they are certainly
good and noble, and each of these in the highest degree; if we are to
take as right the judgment of the good man, for he judges as we have
said.

Thus then Happiness is most excellent, most noble, and most pleasant,
and these attributes are not separated as in the well-known Delian
inscription--

"Most noble is that which is most just, but best is health; And
naturally most pleasant is the obtaining one's desires."

For all these co-exist in the best acts of working: and we say that
Happiness is these, or one, that is, the best of them.

Still it is quite plain that it does require the addition of external
goods, as we have said: because without appliances it is impossible, or
at all events not easy, to do noble actions: for friends, money, and
political influence are in a manner instruments whereby many things
are done: some things there are again a deficiency in which mars
blessedness; good birth, for instance, or fine offspring, or even
personal beauty: for he is not at all capable of Happiness who is very
ugly, or is ill-born, or solitary and childless; and still less perhaps
supposing him to have very bad children or friends, or to have lost good
ones by death. As we have said already, the addition of prosperity of
this kind does seem necessary to complete the idea of Happiness; hence
some rank good fortune, and others virtue, with Happiness.

And hence too a question is raised, whether it is a thing that can be
learned, or acquired by habituation or discipline of some other kind, or
whether it comes in the way of divine dispensation, or even in the way
of chance.

Now to be sure, if anything else is a gift of the Gods to men, it is
probable that Happiness is a gift of theirs too, and specially because
of all human goods it is the highest. But this, it may be, is a question
belonging more properly to an investigation different from ours: and it
is quite clear, that on the supposition of its not being sent from the
Gods direct, but coming to us by reason of virtue and learning of a
certain kind, or discipline, it is yet one of the most Godlike things;
because the prize and End of virtue is manifestly somewhat most
excellent, nay divine and blessed.

It will also on this supposition be widely participated, for it may
through learning and diligence of a certain kind exist in all who have
not been maimed for virtue.

And if it is better we should be happy thus than as a result of chance,
this is in itself an argument that the case is so; because those things
which are in the way of nature, and in like manner of art, and of every
cause, and specially the best cause, are by nature in the best way
possible: to leave them to chance what is greatest and most noble would
be very much out of harmony with all these facts.

The question may be determined also by a reference to our definition of
Happiness, that it is a working of the soul in the way of excellence or
virtue of a certain kind: and of the other goods, some we must have to
begin with, and those which are co-operative and useful are given by
nature as instruments.

These considerations will harmonise also with what we said at the
commencement: for we assumed the End of [Greek Text: poletikae] to be
most excellent: now this bestows most care on making the members of the
community of a certain character; good that is and apt to do what is
honourable.

With good reason then neither ox nor horse nor any other brute animal
do we call happy, for none of them can partake in such working: and for
this same reason a child is not happy either, because by reason of his
tender age he cannot yet perform such actions: if the term is applied,
it is by way of anticipation.

For to constitute Happiness, there must be, as we have said, complete
virtue and a complete life: for many changes and chances of all kinds
arise during a life, and he who is most prosperous may become involved
in great misfortunes in his old age, as in the heroic poems the tale is
told of Priam: but the man who has experienced such fortune and died in
wretchedness, no man calls happy.

Are we then to call no man happy while he lives, and, as Solon would
have us, look to the end? And again, if we are to maintain this
position, is a man then happy when he is dead? or is not this a complete
absurdity, specially in us who say Happiness is a working of a certain
kind?

If on the other hand we do not assert that the dead man is happy, and
Solon does not mean this, but only that one would then be safe in
pronouncing a man happy, as being thenceforward out of the reach of
evils and misfortunes, this too admits of some dispute, since it is
thought that the dead has somewhat both of good and evil (if, as we must
allow, a man may have when alive but not aware of the circumstances),
as honour and dishonour, and good and bad fortune of children and
descendants generally.

Nor is this view again without its difficulties: for, after a man has
lived in blessedness to old age and died accordingly, many changes may
befall him in right of his descendants; some of them may be good and
obtain positions in life accordant to their merits, others again quite
the contrary: it is plain too that the descendants may at different
intervals or grades stand in all manner of relations to the ancestors.
Absurd indeed would be the position that even the dead man is to change
about with them and become at one time happy and at another miserable.
Absurd however it is on the other hand that the affairs of the
descendants should in no degree and during no time affect the ancestors.

But we must revert to the point first raised, since the present question
will be easily determined from that.

If then we are to look to the end and then pronounce the man blessed,
not as being so but as having been so at some previous time, surely it
is absurd that when he _is_ happy the truth is not to be asserted of
him, because we are unwilling to pronounce the living happy by reason of
their liability to changes, and because, whereas we have conceived of
happiness as something stable and no way easily changeable, the fact is
that good and bad fortune are constantly circling about the same people:
for it is quite plain, that if we are to depend upon the fortunes of
men, we shall often have to call the same man happy, and a little while
after miserable, thus representing our happy man

  "Chameleon-like, and based on rottenness."

Is not this the solution? that to make our sentence dependent on the
changes of fortune, is no way right: for not in them stands the well, or
the ill, but though human life needs these as accessories (which we have
allowed already), the workings in the way of virtue are what determine
Happiness, and the contrary the contrary.

And, by the way, the question which has been here discussed, testifies
incidentally to the truth of our account of Happiness. For to nothing
does a stability of human results attach so much as it does to the
workings in the way of virtue, since these are held to be more abiding
even than the sciences: and of these last again the most precious
are the most abiding, because the blessed live in them most and most
continuously, which seems to be the reason why they are not forgotten.
So then this stability which is sought will be in the happy man, and
he will be such through life, since always, or most of all, he will be
doing and contemplating the things which are in the way of virtue: and
the various chances of life he will bear most nobly, and at all times
and in all ways harmoniously, since he is the truly good man, or in the
terms of our proverb "a faultless cube."

And whereas the incidents of chance are many, and differ in greatness
and smallness, the small pieces of good or ill fortune evidently do not
affect the balance of life, but the great and numerous, if happening for
good, will make life more blessed (for it is their nature to contribute
to ornament, and the using of them comes to be noble and excellent), but
if for ill, they bruise as it were and maim the blessedness: for they
bring in positive pain, and hinder many acts of working. But still, even
in these, nobleness shines through when a man bears contentedly many and
great mischances not from insensibility to pain but because he is noble
and high-spirited.

And if, as we have said, the acts of working are what determine the
character of the life, no one of the blessed can ever become wretched,
because he will never do those things which are hateful and mean. For
the man who is truly good and sensible bears all fortunes, we presume,
becomingly, and always does what is noblest under the circumstances,
just as a good general employs to the best advantage the force he has
with him; or a good shoemaker makes the handsomest shoe he can out
of the leather which has been given him; and all other good artisans
likewise. And if this be so, wretched never can the happy man come to
be: I do not mean to say he will be blessed should he fall into fortunes
like those of Priam.

Nor, in truth, is he shifting and easily changeable, for on the one
hand from his happiness he will not be shaken easily nor by ordinary
mischances, but, if at all, by those which are great and numerous; and,
on the other, after such mischances he cannot regain his happiness in a
little time; but, if at all, in a long and complete period, during which
he has made himself master of great and noble things.

Why then should we not call happy the man who works in the way of
perfect virtue, and is furnished with external goods sufficient for
acting his part in the drama of life: and this during no ordinary period
but such as constitutes a complete life as we have been describing it.

Or we must add, that not only is he to live so, but his death must be in
keeping with such life, since the future is dark to us, and Happiness we
assume to be in every way an end and complete. And, if this be so, we
shall call them among the living blessed who have and will have the
things specified, but blessed _as Men_.

On these points then let it suffice to have denned thus much.


XI

Now that the fortunes of their descendants, and friends generally,
contribute nothing towards forming the condition of the dead, is plainly
a very heartless notion, and contrary to the current opinions.

But since things which befall are many, and differ in all kinds of ways,
and some touch more nearly, others less, to go into minute particular
distinctions would evidently be a long and endless task: and so it may
suffice to speak generally and in outline.

If then, as of the misfortunes which happen to one's self, some have a
certain weight and turn the balance of life, while others are, so to
speak, lighter; so it is likewise with those which befall all our
friends alike; if further, whether they whom each suffering befalls
be alive or dead makes much more difference than in a tragedy the
presupposing or actual perpetration of the various crimes and horrors,
we must take into our account this difference also, and still more
perhaps the doubt concerning the dead whether they really partake of any
good or evil; it seems to result from all these considerations, that if
anything does pierce the veil and reach them, be the same good or bad,
it must be something trivial and small, either in itself or to them; or
at least of such a magnitude or such a kind as neither to make happy
them that are not so otherwise, nor to deprive of their blessedness them
that are.

It is plain then that the good or ill fortunes of their friends do
affect the dead somewhat: but in such kind and degree as neither to make
the happy unhappy nor produce any other such effect.


XII

Having determined these points, let us examine with respect to
Happiness, whether it belongs to the class of things praiseworthy or
things precious; for to that of faculties it evidently does not.

Now it is plain that everything which is a subject of praise is praised
for being of a certain kind and bearing a certain relation to something
else: for instance, the just, and the valiant, and generally the good
man, and virtue itself, we praise because of the actions and the
results: and the strong man, and the quick runner, and so forth, we
praise for being of a certain nature and bearing a certain relation to
something good and excellent (and this is illustrated by attempts to
praise the gods; for they are presented in a ludicrous aspect by being
referred to our standard, and this results from the fact, that all
praise does, as we have said, imply reference to a standard). Now if
it is to such objects that praise belongs, it is evident that what is
applicable to the best objects is not praise, but something higher and
better: which is plain matter of fact, for not only do we call the gods
blessed and happy, but of men also we pronounce those blessed who most
nearly resemble the gods. And in like manner in respect of goods; no man
thinks of praising Happiness as he does the principle of justice, but
calls it blessed, as being somewhat more godlike and more excellent.

Eudoxus too is thought to have advanced a sound argument in support of
the claim of pleasure to the highest prize: for the fact that, though it
is one of the good things, it is not praised, he took for an indication
of its superiority to those which are subjects of praise: a superiority
he attributed also to a god and the Chief Good, on the ground that they
form the standard to which everything besides is referred. For praise
applies to virtue, because it makes men apt to do what is noble; but
encomia to definite works of body or mind.

However, it is perhaps more suitable to a regular treatise on encomia to
pursue this topic with exactness: it is enough for our purpose that from
what has been said it is evident that Happiness belongs to the class of
things precious and final. And it seems to be so also because of its
being a starting-point; which it is, in that with a view to it we all do
everything else that is done; now the starting-point and cause of good
things we assume to be something precious and divine.


XIII

Moreover, since Happiness is a kind of working of the soul in the way
of perfect Excellence, we must inquire concerning Excellence: for so
probably shall we have a clearer view concerning Happiness; and again,
he who is really a statesman is generally thought to have spent most
pains on this, for he wishes to make the citizens good and obedient
to the laws. (For examples of this class we have the lawgivers of the
Cretans and Lacedaemonians and whatever other such there have been.)
But if this investigation belongs properly to [Greek: politikae], then
clearly the inquiry will be in accordance with our original design.

Well, we are to inquire concerning Excellence, _i.e._ Human Excellence
of course, because it was the Chief Good of Man and the Happiness of Man
that we were inquiring of just now. By Human Excellence we mean not that
of man's body but that of his soul; for we call Happiness a working of
the Soul.

And if this is so, it is plain that some knowledge of the nature of the
Soul is necessary for the statesman, just as for the Oculist a knowledge
of the whole body, and the more so in proportion as [Greek: politikae]
is more precious and higher than the healing art: and in fact physicians
of the higher class do busy themselves much with the knowledge of the
body.

So then the statesman is to consider the nature of the Soul: but he must
do so with these objects in view, and so far only as may suffice for
the objects of his special inquiry: for to carry his speculations to a
greater exactness is perhaps a task more laborious than falls within his
province.

In fact, the few statements made on the subject in my popular treatises
are quite enough, and accordingly we will adopt them here: as, that
the Soul consists of two parts, the Irrational and the Rational (as to
whether these are actually divided, as are the parts of the body, and
everything that is capable of division; or are only metaphysically
speaking two, being by nature inseparable, as are convex and concave
circumferences, matters not in respect of our present purpose). And of
the Irrational, the one part seems common to other objects, and in fact
vegetative; I mean the cause of nourishment and growth (for such a
faculty of the Soul one would assume to exist in all things that receive
nourishment, even in embryos, and this the same as in the perfect
creatures; for this is more likely than that it should be a different
one).

Now the Excellence of this manifestly is not peculiar to the human
species but common to others: for this part and this faculty is thought
to work most in time of sleep, and the good and bad man are least
distinguishable while asleep; whence it is a common saying that during
one half of life there is no difference between the happy and the
wretched; and this accords with our anticipations, for sleep is an
inactivity of the soul, in so far as it is denominated good or bad,
except that in some wise some of its movements find their way through
the veil and so the good come to have better dreams than ordinary men.
But enough of this: we must forego any further mention of the nutritive
part, since it is not naturally capable of the Excellence which is
peculiarly human.

And there seems to be another Irrational Nature of the Soul, which yet
in a way partakes of Reason. For in the man who controls his appetites,
and in him who resolves to do so and fails, we praise the Reason or
Rational part of the Soul, because it exhorts aright and to the best
course: but clearly there is in them, beside the Reason, some other
natural principle which fights with and strains against the Reason. (For
in plain terms, just as paralysed limbs of the body when their owners
would move them to the right are borne aside in a contrary direction to
the left, so is it in the case of the Soul, for the impulses of men who
cannot control their appetites are to contrary points: the difference is
that in the case of the body we do see what is borne aside but in the
case of the soul we do not. But, it may be, not the less on that account
are we to suppose that there is in the Soul also somewhat besides the
Reason, which is opposed to this and goes against it; as to _how_ it is
different, that is irrelevant.)

But of Reason this too does evidently partake, as we have said: for
instance, in the man of self-control it obeys Reason: and perhaps in
the man of perfected self-mastery, or the brave man, it is yet more
obedient; in them it agrees entirely with the Reason.

So then the Irrational is plainly twofold: the one part, the merely
vegetative, has no share of Reason, but that of desire, or appetition
generally, does partake of it in a sense, in so far as it is obedient to
it and capable of submitting to its rule. (So too in common phrase we
say we have [Greek: _logos_] of our father or friends, and this in a
different sense from that in which we say we have [Greek: logos] of
mathematics.)

Now that the Irrational is in some way persuaded by the Reason,
admonition, and every act of rebuke and exhortation indicate. If then we
are to say that this also has Reason, then the Rational, as well as the
Irrational, will be twofold, the one supremely and in itself, the other
paying it a kind of filial regard.

The Excellence of Man then is divided in accordance with this
difference: we make two classes, calling the one Intellectual, and
the other Moral; pure science, intelligence, and practical
wisdom--Intellectual: liberality, and perfected self-mastery--Moral: in
speaking of a man's Moral character, we do not say he is a scientific
or intelligent but a meek man, or one of perfected self-mastery: and we
praise the man of science in right of his mental state; and of these
such as are praiseworthy we call Excellences.




BOOK II

Well: human Excellence is of two kinds, Intellectual and Moral: now the
Intellectual springs originally, and is increased subsequently, from
teaching (for the most part that is), and needs therefore experience
and time; whereas the Moral comes from custom, and so the Greek term
denoting it is but a slight deflection from the term denoting custom in
that language.

From this fact it is plain that not one of the Moral Virtues comes to be
in us merely by nature: because of such things as exist by nature, none
can be changed by custom: a stone, for instance, by nature gravitating
downwards, could never by custom be brought to ascend, not even if one
were to try and accustom it by throwing it up ten thousand times; nor
could file again be brought to descend, nor in fact could anything whose
nature is in one way be brought by custom to be in another. The Virtues
then come to be in us neither by nature, nor in despite of nature, but
we are furnished by nature with a capacity for receiving themu and are
perfected in them through custom.

Again, in whatever cases we get things by nature, we get the faculties
first and perform the acts of working afterwards; an illustration of
which is afforded by the case of our bodily senses, for it was not
from having often seen or heard that we got these senses, but just
the reverse: we had them and so exercised them, but did not have
them because we had exercised them. But the Virtues we get by first
performing single acts of working, which, again, is the case of other
things, as the arts for instance; for what we have to make when we
have learned how, these we learn how to make by making: men come to be
builders, for instance, by building; harp-players, by playing on the
harp: exactly so, by doing just actions we come to be just; by doing the
actions of self-mastery we come to be perfected in self-mastery; and by
doing brave actions brave.

And to the truth of this testimony is borne by what takes place in
communities: because the law-givers make the individual members good men
by habituation, and this is the intention certainly of every law-giver,
and all who do not effect it well fail of their intent; and herein
consists the difference between a good Constitution and a bad.

Again, every Virtue is either produced or destroyed from and by the very
same circumstances: art too in like manner; I mean it is by playing
the harp that both the good and the bad harp-players are formed: and
similarly builders and all the rest; by building well men will become
good builders; by doing it badly bad ones: in fact, if this had not been
so, there would have been no need of instructors, but all men would have
been at once good or bad in their several arts without them.

So too then is it with the Virtues: for by acting in the various
relations in which we are thrown with our fellow men, we come to be,
some just, some unjust: and by acting in dangerous positions and being
habituated to feel fear or confidence, we come to be, some brave, others
cowards.

Similarly is it also with respect to the occasions of lust and anger:
for some men come to be perfected in self-mastery and mild, others
destitute of all self-control and passionate; the one class by behaving
in one way under them, the other by behaving in another. Or, in one
word, the habits are produced from the acts of working like to them: and
so what we have to do is to give a certain character to these particular
acts, because the habits formed correspond to the differences of these.

So then, whether we are accustomed this way or that straight from
childhood, makes not a small but an important difference, or rather I
would say it makes all the difference.


II

Since then the object of the present treatise is not mere speculation,
as it is of some others (for we are inquiring not merely that we may
know what virtue is but that we may become virtuous, else it would have
been useless), we must consider as to the particular actions how we are
to do them, because, as we have just said, the quality of the habits
that shall be formed depends on these.

Now, that we are to act in accordance with Right Reason is a general
maxim, and may for the present be taken for granted: we will speak of it
hereafter, and say both what Right Reason is, and what are its relations
to the other virtues.

[Sidenote: 1104a]

But let this point be first thoroughly understood between us, that all
which can be said on moral action must be said in outline, as it were,
and not exactly: for as we remarked at the commencement, such reasoning
only must be required as the nature of the subject-matter admits of, and
matters of moral action and expediency have no fixedness any more than
matters of health. And if the subject in its general maxims is such,
still less in its application to particular cases is exactness
attainable: because these fall not under any art or system of rules, but
it must be left in each instance to the individual agents to look to the
exigencies of the particular case, as it is in the art of healing,
or that of navigating a ship. Still, though the present subject is
confessedly such, we must try and do what we can for it.

First then this must be noted, that it is the nature of such things to
be spoiled by defect and excess; as we see in the case of health and
strength (since for the illustration of things which cannot be seen we
must use those that can), for excessive training impairs the strength as
well as deficient: meat and drink, in like manner, in too great or too
small quantities, impair the health: while in due proportion they cause,
increase, and preserve it.

Thus it is therefore with the habits of perfected Self-Mastery and
Courage and the rest of the Virtues: for the man who flies from and
fears all things, and never stands up against anything, comes to be a
coward; and he who fears nothing, but goes at everything, comes to be
rash. In like manner too, he that tastes of every pleasure and abstains
from none comes to lose all self-control; while he who avoids all, as
do the dull and clownish, comes as it were to lose his faculties of
perception: that is to say, the habits of perfected Self-Mastery and
Courage are spoiled by the excess and defect, but by the mean state are
preserved.

Furthermore, not only do the origination, growth, and marring of the
habits come from and by the same circumstances, but also the acts of
working after the habits are formed will be exercised on the same: for
so it is also with those other things which are more directly matters of
sight, strength for instance: for this comes by taking plenty of food
and doing plenty of work, and the man who has attained strength is best
able to do these: and so it is with the Virtues, for not only do we by
abstaining from pleasures come to be perfected in Self-Mastery, but when
we have come to be so we can best abstain from them: similarly too with
Courage: for it is by accustoming ourselves to despise objects of fear
and stand up against them that we come to be brave; and [Sidenote(?):
1104_b_] after we have come to be so we shall be best able to stand up
against such objects.

And for a test of the formation of the habits we must [Sidenote(?): III]
take the pleasure or pain which succeeds the acts; for he is perfected
in Self-Mastery who not only abstains from the bodily pleasures but is
glad to do so; whereas he who abstains but is sorry to do it has not
Self-Mastery: he again is brave who stands up against danger, either
with positive pleasure or at least without any pain; whereas he who does
it with pain is not brave.

For Moral Virtue has for its object-matter pleasures and pains, because
by reason of pleasure we do what is bad, and by reason of pain decline
doing what is right (for which cause, as Plato observes, men should have
been trained straight from their childhood to receive pleasure and pain
from proper objects, for this is the right education). Again: since
Virtues have to do with actions and feelings, and on every feeling and
every action pleasure and pain follow, here again is another proof that
Virtue has for its object-matter pleasure and pain. The same is
shown also by the fact that punishments are effected through the
instrumentality of these; because they are of the nature of remedies,
and it is the nature of remedies to be the contraries of the ills they
cure. Again, to quote what we said before: every habit of the Soul by
its very nature has relation to, and exerts itself upon, things of the
same kind as those by which it is naturally deteriorated or improved:
now such habits do come to be vicious by reason of pleasures and pains,
that is, by men pursuing or avoiding respectively, either such as they
ought not, or at wrong times, or in wrong manner, and so forth (for
which reason, by the way, some people define the Virtues as certain
states of impassibility and utter quietude, but they are wrong because
they speak without modification, instead of adding "as they ought," "as
they ought not," and "when," and so on). Virtue then is assumed to be
that habit which is such, in relation to pleasures and pains, as to
effect the best results, and Vice the contrary.

The following considerations may also serve to set this in a clear
light. There are principally three things moving us to choice and three
to avoidance, the honourable, the expedient, the pleasant; and their
three contraries, the dishonourable, the hurtful, and the painful: now
the good man is apt to go right, and the bad man wrong, with respect
to all these of course, but most specially with respect to pleasure:
because not only is this common to him with all animals but also it is
a concomitant of all those things which move to choice, since both the
honourable and the expedient give an impression of pleasure.

[Sidenote: 1105a] Again, it grows up with us all from infancy, and so it
is a hard matter to remove from ourselves this feeling, engrained as it
is into our very life.

Again, we adopt pleasure and pain (some of us more, and some less) as
the measure even of actions: for this cause then our whole business must
be with them, since to receive right or wrong impressions of pleasure
and pain is a thing of no little importance in respect of the actions.
Once more; it is harder, as Heraclitus says, to fight against pleasure
than against anger: now it is about that which is more than commonly
difficult that art comes into being, and virtue too, because in that
which is difficult the good is of a higher order: and so for this
reason too both virtue and moral philosophy generally must wholly busy
themselves respecting pleasures and pains, because he that uses these
well will be good, he that does so ill will be bad.

Let us then be understood to have stated, that Virtue has for its
object-matter pleasures and pains, and that it is either increased or
marred by the same circumstances (differently used) by which it
is originally generated, and that it exerts itself on the same
circumstances out of which it was generated.

Now I can conceive a person perplexed as to the meaning of our
statement, that men must do just actions to become just, and those of
self-mastery to acquire the habit of self-mastery; "for," he would say,
"if men are doing the actions they have the respective virtues already,
just as men are grammarians or musicians when they do the actions of
either art." May we not reply by saying that it is not so even in the
case of the arts referred to: because a man may produce something
grammatical either by chance or the suggestion of another; but then only
will he be a grammarian when he not only produces something grammatical
but does so grammarian-wise, _i.e._ in virtue of the grammatical
knowledge he himself possesses.

Again, the cases of the arts and the virtues are not parallel: because
those things which are produced by the arts have their excellence in
themselves, and it is sufficient therefore [Sidenote: 1105b] that these
when produced should be in a certain state: but those which are produced
in the way of the virtues, are, strictly speaking, actions of a certain
kind (say of Justice or perfected Self-Mastery), not merely if in
themselves they are in a certain state but if also he who does them
does them being himself in a certain state, first if knowing what he is
doing, next if with deliberate preference, and with such preference for
the things' own sake; and thirdly if being himself stable and unapt to
change. Now to constitute possession of the arts these requisites are
not reckoned in, excepting the one point of knowledge: whereas for
possession of the virtues knowledge avails little or nothing, but the
other requisites avail not a little, but, in fact, are all in all, and
these requisites as a matter of fact do come from oftentimes doing the
actions of Justice and perfected Self-Mastery.

The facts, it is true, are called by the names of these habits when they
are such as the just or perfectly self-mastering man would do; but he is
not in possession of the virtues who merely does these facts, but he who
also so does them as the just and self-mastering do them.

We are right then in saying, that these virtues are formed in a man by
his doing the actions; but no one, if he should leave them undone, would
be even in the way to become a good man. Yet people in general do not
perform these actions, but taking refuge in talk they flatter themselves
they are philosophising, and that they will so be good men: acting in
truth very like those sick people who listen to the doctor with great
attention but do nothing that he tells them: just as these then cannot
be well bodily under such a course of treatment, so neither can those be
mentally by such philosophising.

[Sidenote: V] Next, we must examine what Virtue is. Well, since the
things which come to be in the mind are, in all, of three kinds,
Feelings, Capacities, States, Virtue of course must belong to one of the
three classes.

By Feelings, I mean such as lust, anger, fear, confidence, envy, joy,
friendship, hatred, longing, emulation, compassion, in short all such as
are followed by pleasure or pain: by Capacities, those in right of which
we are said to be capable of these feelings; as by virtue of which we
are able to have been made angry, or grieved, or to have compassionated;
by States, those in right of which we are in a certain relation good
or bad to the aforementioned feelings; to having been made angry, for
instance, we are in a wrong relation if in our anger we were too violent
or too slack, but if we were in the happy medium we are in a right
relation to the feeling. And so on of the rest.

Now Feelings neither the virtues nor vices are, because in right of the
Feelings we are not denominated either good or bad, but in right of the
virtues and vices we are.

[Sidenote: 1106_a_] Again, in right of the Feelings we are neither
praised nor blamed (for a man is not commended for being afraid or
being angry, nor blamed for being angry merely but for being so in a
particular way), but in right of the virtues and vices we are.

Again, both anger and fear we feel without moral choice, whereas the
virtues are acts of moral choice, or at least certainly not independent
of it.

Moreover, in right of the Feelings we are said to be moved, but in right
of the virtues and vices not to be moved, but disposed, in a certain
way.

And for these same reasons they are not Capacities, for we are not
called good or bad merely because we are able to feel, nor are we
praised or blamed.

And again, Capacities we have by nature, but we do not come to be good
or bad by nature, as we have said before.

Since then the virtues are neither Feelings nor Capacities, it remains
that they must be States.

[Sidenote: VI] Now what the genus of Virtue is has been said; but we
must not merely speak of it thus, that it is a state but say also what
kind of a state it is. We must observe then that all excellence makes
that whereof it is the excellence both to be itself in a good state and
to perform its work well. The excellence of the eye, for instance, makes
both the eye good and its work also: for by the excellence of the eye
we see well. So too the excellence of the horse makes a horse good, and
good in speed, and in carrying his rider, and standing up against the
enemy. If then this is universally the case, the excellence of Man, i.e.
Virtue, must be a state whereby Man comes to be good and whereby he will
perform well his proper work. Now how this shall be it is true we have
said already, but still perhaps it may throw light on the subject to see
what is its characteristic nature.

In all quantity then, whether continuous or discrete, one may take the
greater part, the less, or the exactly equal, and these either with
reference to the thing itself, or relatively to us: and the exactly
equal is a mean between excess and defect. Now by the mean of the thing,
_i.e._ absolute mean, I denote that which is equidistant from either
extreme (which of course is one and the same to all), and by the mean
relatively to ourselves, that which is neither too much nor too little
for the particular individual. This of course is not one nor the same to
all: for instance, suppose ten is too much and two too little, people
take six for the absolute mean; because it exceeds the smaller sum by
exactly as much as it is itself exceeded by the larger, and this mean is
according to arithmetical proportion.

[Sidenote: 1106_b_] But the mean relatively to ourselves must not be
so found ; for it does not follow, supposing ten min\E6 is too large a
quantity to eat and two too small, that the trainer will order his man
six; because for the person who is to take it this also may be too much
or too little: for Milo it would be too little, but for a man just
commencing his athletic exercises too much: similarly too of the
exercises themselves, as running or wrestling.

So then it seems every one possessed of skill avoids excess and defect,
but seeks for and chooses the mean, not the absolute but the relative.

Now if all skill thus accomplishes well its work by keeping an eye on
the mean, and bringing the works to this point (whence it is common
enough to say of such works as are in a good state, "one cannot add
to or take ought from them," under the notion of excess or defect
destroying goodness but the mean state preserving it), and good
artisans, as we say, work with their eye on this, and excellence, like
nature, is more exact and better than any art in the world, it must have
an aptitude to aim at the mean.

It is moral excellence, _i.e._ Virtue, of course which I mean, because
this it is which is concerned with feelings and actions, and in these
there can be excess and defect and the mean: it is possible, for
instance, to feel the emotions of fear, confidence, lust, anger,
compassion, and pleasure and pain generally, too much or too little,
and in either case wrongly; but to feel them when we ought, on what
occasions, towards whom, why, and as, we should do, is the mean, or in
other words the best state, and this is the property of Virtue.

In like manner too with respect to the actions, there may be excess and
defect and the mean. Now Virtue is concerned with feelings and actions,
in which the excess is wrong and the defect is blamed but the mean is
praised and goes right; and both these circumstances belong to Virtue.
Virtue then is in a sense a mean state, since it certainly has an
aptitude for aiming at the mean.

Again, one may go wrong in many different ways (because, as the
Pythagoreans expressed it, evil is of the class of the infinite, good
of the finite), but right only in one; and so the former is easy, the
latter difficult; easy to miss the mark, but hard to hit it: and for
these reasons, therefore, both the excess and defect belong to Vice, and
the mean state to Virtue; for, as the poet has it,

  "Men may be bad in many ways,
  But good in one alone."
Virtue then is "a state apt to exercise deliberate choice, being in the
relative mean, determined by reason, and as the man of practical wisdom
would determine."

It is a middle state between too faulty ones, in the way of excess on
one side and of defect on the other: and it is so moreover, because the
faulty states on one side fall short of, and those on the other exceed,
what is right, both in the case of the feelings and the actions; but
Virtue finds, and when found adopts, the mean.

And so, viewing it in respect of its essence and definition, Virtue is a
mean state; but in reference to the chief good and to excellence it is
the highest state possible.

But it must not be supposed that every action or every feeling is
capable of subsisting in this mean state, because some there are
which are so named as immediately to convey the notion of badness, as
malevolence, shamelessness, envy; or, to instance in actions, adultery,
theft, homicide; for all these and suchlike are blamed because they are
in themselves bad, not the having too much or too little of them.

In these then you never can go right, but must always be wrong: nor in
such does the right or wrong depend on the selection of a proper person,
time, or manner (take adultery for instance), but simply doing any one
soever of those things is being wrong.

You might as well require that there should be determined a mean state,
an excess and a defect in respect of acting unjustly, being cowardly, or
giving up all control of the passions: for at this rate there will be
of excess and defect a mean state; of excess, excess; and of defect,
defect.

But just as of perfected self-mastery and courage there is no excess and
defect, because the mean is in one point of view the highest possible
state, so neither of those faulty states can you have a mean state,
excess, or defect, but howsoever done they are wrong: you cannot, in
short, have of excess and defect a mean state, nor of a mean state
excess and defect.


VII

It is not enough, however, to state this in general terms, we must also
apply it to particular instances, because in treatises on moral conduct
general statements have an air of vagueness, but those which go into
detail one of greater reality: for the actions after all must be in
detail, and the general statements, to be worth anything, must hold good
here.

We must take these details then from the Table.

I. In respect of fears and confidence or boldness:

[Sidenote: 1107b]

The Mean state is Courage: men may exceed, of course, either in absence
of fear or in positive confidence: the former has no name (which is a
common case), the latter is called rash: again, the man who has too much
fear and too little confidence is called a coward.

II. In respect of pleasures and pains (but not all, and perhaps fewer
pains than pleasures):

The Mean state here is perfected Self-Mastery, the defect total absence
of Self-control. As for defect in respect of pleasure, there are really
no people who are chargeable with it, so, of course, there is really no
name for such characters, but, as they are conceivable, we will give
them one and call them insensible.

III. In respect of giving and taking wealth (a):

The mean state is Liberality, the excess Prodigality, the defect
Stinginess: here each of the extremes involves really an excess and
defect contrary to each other: I mean, the prodigal gives out too much
and takes in too little, while the stingy man takes in too much and
gives out too little. (It must be understood that we are now giving
merely an outline and summary, intentionally: and we will, in a later
part of the treatise, draw out the distinctions with greater exactness.)

IV. In respect of wealth (b):

There are other dispositions besides these just mentioned; a mean state
called Munificence (for the munificent man differs from the liberal, the
former having necessarily to do with great wealth, the latter with but
small); the excess called by the names either of Want of taste or
Vulgar Profusion, and the defect Paltriness (these also differ from the
extremes connected with liberality, and the manner of their difference
shall also be spoken of later).

V. In respect of honour and dishonour (a):

The mean state Greatness of Soul, the excess which may be called
braggadocio, and the defect Littleness of Soul.

VI. In respect of honour and dishonour (b):

[Sidenote: 1108a]

Now there is a state bearing the same relation to Greatness of Soul as
we said just now Liberality does to Munificence, with the difference
that is of being about a small amount of the same thing: this state
having reference to small honour, as Greatness of Soul to great honour;
a man may, of course, grasp at honour either more than he should or
less; now he that exceeds in his grasping at it is called ambitious, he
that falls short unambitious, he that is just as he should be has no
proper name: nor in fact have the states, except that the disposition of
the ambitious man is called ambition. For this reason those who are in
either extreme lay claim to the mean as a debateable land, and we call
the virtuous character sometimes by the name ambitious, sometimes by
that of unambitious, and we commend sometimes the one and sometimes
the other. Why we do it shall be said in the subsequent part of the
treatise; but now we will go on with the rest of the virtues after the
plan we have laid down.

VII. In respect of anger:

Here too there is excess, defect, and a mean state; but since they
may be said to have really no proper names, as we call the virtuous
character Meek, we will call the mean state Meekness, and of the
extremes, let the man who is excessive be denominated Passionate, and
the faulty state Passionateness, and him who is deficient Angerless, and
the defect Angerlessness.

There are also three other mean states, having some mutual resemblance,
but still with differences; they are alike in that they all have for
their object-matter intercourse of words and deeds, and they differ in
that one has respect to truth herein, the other two to what is pleasant;
and this in two ways, the one in relaxation and amusement, the other in
all things which occur in daily life. We must say a word or two about
these also, that we may the better see that in all matters the mean is
praiseworthy, while the extremes are neither right nor worthy of praise
but of blame.

Now of these, it is true, the majority have really no proper names, but
still we must try, as in the other cases, to coin some for them for the
sake of clearness and intelligibleness.

I. In respect of truth: The man who is in the mean state we will call
Truthful, and his state Truthfulness, and as to the disguise of truth,
if it be on the side of exaggeration, Braggadocia, and him that has it a
Braggadocio; if on that of diminution, Reserve and Reserved shall be the
terms.

II. In respect of what is pleasant in the way of relaxation or
amusement: The mean state shall be called Easy-pleasantry, and the
character accordingly a man of Easy-pleasantry; the excess Buffoonery,
and the man a Buffoon; the man deficient herein a Clown, and his state
Clownishness.

III. In respect of what is pleasant in daily life: He that is as he
should be may be called Friendly, and his mean state Friendliness: he
that exceeds, if it be without any interested motive, somewhat too
Complaisant, if with such motive, a Flatterer: he that is deficient and
in all instances unpleasant, Quarrelsome and Cross.

There are mean states likewise in feelings and matters concerning them.
Shamefacedness, for instance, is no virtue, still a man is praised for
being shamefaced: for in these too the one is denominated the man in the
mean state, the other in the excess; the Dumbfoundered, for instance,
who is overwhelmed with shame on all and any occasions: the man who is
in the defect, _i.e._ who has no shame at all in his composition, is
called Shameless: but the right character Shamefaced.

Indignation against successful vice, again, is a state in the mean
between Envy and Malevolence: they all three have respect to pleasure
and pain produced by what happens to one's neighbour: for the man who
has this right feeling is annoyed at undeserved success of others, while
the envious man goes beyond him and is annoyed at all success of others,
and the malevolent falls so far short of feeling annoyance that he even
rejoices [at misfortune of others].

But for the discussion of these also there will be another opportunity,
as of Justice too, because the term is used in more senses than one. So
after this we will go accurately into each and say how they are mean
states: and in like manner also with respect to the Intellectual
Excellences.

Now as there are three states in each case, two faulty either in the way
of excess or defect, and one right, which is the mean state, of course
all are in a way opposed to one another; the extremes, for instance, not
only to the mean but also to one another, and the mean to the extremes:
for just as the half is greater if compared with the less portion, and
less if compared with the greater, so the mean states, compared with the
defects, exceed, whether in feelings or actions, and _vice versa_. The
brave man, for instance, shows as rash when compared with the coward,
and cowardly when compared with the rash; similarly too the man of
perfected self-mastery, viewed in comparison with the man destitute of
all perception, shows like a man of no self-control, but in comparison
with the man who really has no self-control, he looks like one destitute
of all perception: and the liberal man compared with the stingy seems
prodigal, and by the side of the prodigal, stingy.

And so the extreme characters push away, so to speak, towards each other
the man in the mean state; the brave man is called a rash man by
the coward, and a coward by the rash man, and in the other cases
accordingly. And there being this mutual opposition, the contrariety
between the extremes is greater than between either and the mean,
because they are further from one another than from the mean, just as
the greater or less portion differ more from each other than either from
the exact half.

Again, in some cases an extreme will bear a resemblance to the mean;
rashness, for instance, to courage, and prodigality to liberality; but
between the extremes there is the greatest dissimilarity. Now things
which are furthest from one another are defined to be contrary, and so
the further off the more contrary will they be.

[Sidenote: 1109a] Further: of the extremes in some cases the excess,
and in others the defect, is most opposed to the mean: to courage, for
instance, not rashness which is the excess, but cowardice which is the
defect; whereas to perfected self-mastery not insensibility which is the
defect but absence of all self-control which is the excess.

And for this there are two reasons to be given; one from the nature of
the thing itself, because from the one extreme being nearer and more
like the mean, we do not put this against it, but the other; as, for
instance, since rashness is thought to be nearer to courage than
cowardice is, and to resemble it more, we put cowardice against courage
rather than rashness, because those things which are further from the
mean are thought to be more contrary to it. This then is one reason
arising from the thing itself; there is another arising from our own
constitution and make: for in each man's own case those things give the
impression of being more contrary to the mean to which we individually
have a natural bias. Thus we have a natural bias towards pleasures,
for which reason we are much more inclined to the rejection of all
self-control, than to self-discipline.

These things then to which the bias is, we call more contrary, and so
total want of self-control (the excess) is more contrary than the defect
is to perfected self-mastery.


IX

Now that Moral Virtue is a mean state, and how it is so, and that it
lies between two faulty states, one in the way of excess and another in
the way of defect, and that it is so because it has an aptitude to aim
at the mean both in feelings and actions, all this has been set forth
fully and sufficiently.

And so it is hard to be good: for surely hard it is in each instance to
find the mean, just as to find the mean point or centre of a circle is
not what any man can do, but only he who knows how: just so to be angry,
to give money, and be expensive, is what any man can do, and easy: but
to do these to the right person, in due proportion, at the right time,
with a right object, and in the right manner, this is not as before what
any man can do, nor is it easy; and for this cause goodness is rare, and
praiseworthy, and noble.

Therefore he who aims at the mean should make it his first care to keep
away from that extreme which is more contrary than the other to the
mean; just as Calypso in Homer advises Ulysses,

  "Clear of this smoke and surge thy barque direct;"

because of the two extremes the one is always more, and the other
less, erroneous; and, therefore, since to hit exactly on the mean is
difficult, one must take the least of the evils as the safest plan; and
this a man will be doing, if he follows this method.

[Sidenote: 1109b] We ought also to take into consideration our own
natural bias; which varies in each man's case, and will be ascertained
from the pleasure and pain arising in us. Furthermore, we should force
ourselves off in the contrary direction, because we shall find ourselves
in the mean after we have removed ourselves far from the wrong side,
exactly as men do in straightening bent timber.

But in all cases we must guard most carefully against what is pleasant,
and pleasure itself, because we are not impartial judges of it.

We ought to feel in fact towards pleasure as did the old counsellors
towards Helen, and in all cases pronounce a similar sentence; for so by
sending it away from us, we shall err the less.

Well, to speak very briefly, these are the precautions by adopting which
we shall be best able to attain the mean.

Still, perhaps, after all it is a matter of difficulty, and specially
in the particular instances: it is not easy, for instance, to determine
exactly in what manner, with what persons, for what causes, and for what
length of time, one ought to feel anger: for we ourselves sometimes
praise those who are defective in this feeling, and we call them meek;
at another, we term the hot-tempered manly and spirited.

Then, again, he who makes a small deflection from what is right, be it
on the side of too much or too little, is not blamed, only he who makes
a considerable one; for he cannot escape observation. But to what point
or degree a man must err in order to incur blame, it is not easy to
determine exactly in words: nor in fact any of those points which are
matter of perception by the Moral Sense: such questions are matters of
detail, and the decision of them rests with the Moral Sense.

At all events thus much is plain, that the mean state is in all things
praiseworthy, and that practically we must deflect sometimes towards
excess sometimes towards defect, because this will be the easiest method
of hitting on the mean, that is, on what is right.




BOOK III

I Now since Virtue is concerned with the regulation of feelings and
actions, and praise and blame arise upon such as are voluntary, while
for the involuntary allowance is made, and sometimes compassion is
excited, it is perhaps a necessary task for those who are investigating
the nature of Virtue to draw out the distinction between what is
voluntary and what involuntary; and it is certainly useful for
legislators, with respect to the assigning of honours and punishments.



III

Involuntary actions then are thought to be of two kinds, being
done either on compulsion, or by reason of ignorance. An action is,
properly speaking, compulsory, when the origination is external to the
agent, being such that in it the agent (perhaps we may more properly
say the patient) contributes nothing; as if a wind were to convey you
anywhere, or men having power over your person.

But when actions are done, either from fear of greater evils, or from
some honourable motive, as, for instance, if you were ordered to commit
some base act by a despot who had your parents or children in his power,
and they were to be saved upon your compliance or die upon your refusal,
in such cases there is room for a question whether the actions are
voluntary or involuntary.

A similar question arises with respect to cases of throwing goods
overboard in a storm: abstractedly no man throws away his property
willingly, but with a view to his own and his shipmates' safety any one
would who had any sense.

The truth is, such actions are of a mixed kind, but are most like
voluntary actions; for they are choiceworthy at the time when they are
being done, and the end or object of the action must be taken with
reference to the actual occasion. Further, we must denominate an action
voluntary or involuntary at the time of doing it: now in the given case
the man acts voluntarily, because the originating of the motion of his
limbs in such actions rests with himself; and where the origination is
in himself it rests with himself to do or not to do.

Such actions then are voluntary, though in the abstract perhaps
involuntary because no one would choose any of such things in and by
itself.

But for such actions men sometimes are even praised, as when they endure
any disgrace or pain to secure great and honourable equivalents; if
_vice vers\E2_, then they are blamed, because it shows a base mind to
endure things very disgraceful for no honourable object, or for a
trifling one.

For some again no praise is given, but allowance is made; as where a
man does what he should not by reason of such things as overstrain the
powers of human nature, or pass the limits of human endurance.

Some acts perhaps there are for which compulsion cannot be pleaded, but
a man should rather suffer the worst and die; how absurd, for instance,
are the pleas of compulsion with which Alcmaeon in Euripides' play
excuses his matricide!

But it is difficult sometimes to decide what kind of thing should be
chosen instead of what, or what endured in preference to what, and much
moreso to abide by one's decisions: for in general the alternatives are
painful, and the actions required are base, and so praise or blame is
awarded according as persons have been compelled or no.

1110b What kind of actions then are to be called compulsory? may we say,
simply and abstractedly whenever the cause is external and the agent
contributes nothing; and that where the acts are in themselves such
as one would not wish but choiceworthy at the present time and in
preference to such and such things, and where the origination rests with
the agent, the actions are in themselves involuntary but at the given
time and in preference to such and such things voluntary; and they are
more like voluntary than involuntary, because the actions consist of
little details, and these are voluntary.

But what kind of things one ought to choose instead of what, it is not
easy to settle, for there are many differences in particular instances.

But suppose a person should say, things pleasant and honourable exert
a compulsive force (for that they are external and do compel); at that
rate every action is on compulsion, because these are universal motives
of action.

Again, they who act on compulsion and against their will do so with
pain; but they who act by reason of what is pleasant or honourable act
with pleasure.

It is truly absurd for a man to attribute his actions to external things
instead of to his own capacity for being easily caught by them; or,
again, to ascribe the honourable to himself, and the base ones to
pleasure.

So then that seems to be compulsory "whose origination is from without,
the party compelled contributing nothing." Now every action of which
ignorance is the cause is not-voluntary, but that only is involuntary
which is attended with pain and remorse; for clearly the man who has
done anything by reason of ignorance, but is not annoyed at his own
action, cannot be said to have done it _with_ his will because he did
not know he was doing it, nor again _against_ his will because he is not
sorry for it.

So then of the class "acting by reason of ignorance," he who feels
regret afterwards is thought to be an involuntary agent, and him that
has no such feeling, since he certainly is different from the other, we
will call a not-voluntary agent; for as there is a real difference it is
better to have a proper name.

Again, there seems to be a difference between acting _because of_
ignorance and acting _with_ ignorance: for instance, we do not usually
assign ignorance as the cause of the actions of the drunken or angry
man, but either the drunkenness or the anger, yet they act not knowingly
but with ignorance.

Again, every bad man is ignorant what he ought to do and what to leave
undone, and by reason of such error men become unjust and wholly evil.

[Sidenote: 1111a] Again, we do not usually apply the term involuntary
when a man is ignorant of his own true interest; because ignorance which
affects moral choice constitutes depravity but not involuntariness: nor
does any ignorance of principle (because for this men are blamed)
but ignorance in particular details, wherein consists the action and
wherewith it is concerned, for in these there is both compassion and
allowance, because he who acts in ignorance of any of them acts in a
proper sense involuntarily.

It may be as well, therefore, to define these particular details; what
they are, and how many; viz. who acts, what he is doing, with respect to
what or in what, sometimes with what, as with what instrument, and with
what result (as that of preservation, for instance), and how, as whether
softly or violently.

All these particulars, in one and the same case, no man in his senses
could be ignorant of; plainly not of the agent, being himself. But
what he is doing a man may be ignorant, as men in speaking say a
thing escaped them unawares; or as Aeschylus did with respect to the
Mysteries, that he was not aware that it was unlawful to speak of them;
or as in the case of that catapult accident the other day the man said
he discharged it merely to display its operation. Or a person might
suppose a son to be an enemy, as Merope did; or that the spear really
pointed was rounded off; or that the stone was a pumice; or in striking
with a view to save might kill; or might strike when merely wishing to
show another, as people do in sham-fighting.

Now since ignorance is possible in respect to all these details in
which the action consists, he that acted in ignorance of any of them is
thought to have acted involuntarily, and he most so who was in ignorance
as regards the most important, which are thought to be those in which
the action consists, and the result.

Further, not only must the ignorance be of this kind, to constitute an
action involuntary, but it must be also understood that the action is
followed by pain and regret.

Now since all involuntary action is either upon compulsion or by reason
of ignorance, Voluntary Action would seem to be "that whose origination
is in the agent, he being aware of the particular details in which the
action consists."

For, it may be, men are not justified by calling those actions
involuntary, which are done by reason of Anger or Lust.

Because, in the first place, if this be so no other animal but man, and
not even children, can be said to act voluntarily. Next, is it meant
that we never act voluntarily when we act from Lust or Anger, or that we
act voluntarily in doing what is right and involuntarily in doing what
is discreditable? The latter supposition is absurd, since the cause
is one and the same. Then as to the former, it is a strange thing to
maintain actions to be involuntary which we are bound to grasp at: now
there are occasions on which anger is a duty, and there are things which
we are bound to lust after, health, for instance, and learning.

Again, whereas actions strictly involuntary are thought to be attended
with pain, those which are done to gratify lust are thought to be
pleasant.

Again: how does the involuntariness make any difference between wrong
actions done from deliberate calculation, and those done by reason of
anger? for both ought to be avoided, and the irrational feelings are
thought to be just as natural to man as reason, and so of course must be
such actions of the individual as are done from Anger and Lust. It is
absurd then to class these actions among the involuntary.

II

Having thus drawn out the distinction between voluntary and involuntary
action our next step is to examine into the nature of Moral Choice,
because this seems most intimately connected with Virtue and to be a
more decisive test of moral character than a man's acts are.

Now Moral Choice is plainly voluntary, but the two are not co-extensive,
voluntary being the more comprehensive term; for first, children and all
other animals share in voluntary action but not in Moral Choice; and
next, sudden actions we call voluntary but do not ascribe them to Moral
Choice.

Nor do they appear to be right who say it is lust or anger, or wish, or
opinion of a certain kind; because, in the first place, Moral Choice is
not shared by the irrational animals while Lust and Anger are. Next; the
man who fails of self-control acts from Lust but not from Moral Choice;
the man of self-control, on the contrary, from Moral Choice, not from
Lust. Again: whereas Lust is frequently opposed to Moral Choice, Lust is
not to Lust.

Lastly: the object-matter of Lust is the pleasant and the painful, but
of Moral Choice neither the one nor the other. Still less can it be
Anger, because actions done from Anger are thought generally to be least
of all consequent on Moral Choice.

Nor is it Wish either, though appearing closely connected with it;
because, in the first place, Moral Choice has not for its objects
impossibilities, and if a man were to say he chose them he would be
thought to be a fool; but Wish may have impossible things for its
objects, immortality for instance.

Wish again may be exercised on things in the accomplishment of which
one's self could have nothing to do, as the success of any particular
actor or athlete; but no man chooses things of this nature, only such as
he believes he may himself be instrumental in procuring.

Further: Wish has for its object the End rather, but Moral Choice the
means to the End; for instance, we wish to be healthy but we choose
the means which will make us so; or happiness again we wish for, and
commonly say so, but to say we choose is not an appropriate term,
because, in short, the province of Moral Choice seems to be those things
which are in our own power.

Neither can it be Opinion; for Opinion is thought to be unlimited in its
range of objects, and to be exercised as well upon things eternal and
impossible as on those which are in our own power: again, Opinion is
logically divided into true and false, not into good and bad as Moral
Choice is.

However, nobody perhaps maintains its identity with Opinion simply; but
it is not the same with opinion of any kind, because by choosing good
and bad things we are constituted of a certain character, but by having
opinions on them we are not.

Again, we choose to take or avoid, and so on, but we opine what a thing
is, or for what it is serviceable, or how; but we do not opine to take
or avoid.

Further, Moral Choice is commended rather for having a right object than
for being judicious, but Opinion for being formed in accordance with
truth.

Again, we choose such things as we pretty well know to be good, but we
form opinions respecting such as we do not know at all.

And it is not thought that choosing and opining best always go together,
but that some opine the better course and yet by reason of viciousness
choose not the things which they should.

It may be urged, that Opinion always precedes or accompanies Moral
Choice; be it so, this makes no difference, for this is not the point in
question, but whether Moral Choice is the same as Opinion of a certain
kind.

Since then it is none of the aforementioned things, what is it, or how
is it characterised? Voluntary it plainly is, but not all voluntary
action is an object of Moral Choice. May we not say then, it is "that
voluntary which has passed through a stage of previous deliberation?"
because Moral Choice is attended with reasoning and intellectual
process. The etymology of its Greek name seems to give a hint of it,
being when analysed "chosen in preference to somewhat else."


III

Well then; do men deliberate about everything, and is anything soever
the object of Deliberation, or are there some matters with respect to
which there is none? (It may be as well perhaps to say, that by "object
of Deliberation" is meant such matter as a sensible man would deliberate
upon, not what any fool or madman might.)

Well: about eternal things no one deliberates; as, for instance, the
universe, or the incommensurability of the diameter and side of a
square.

Nor again about things which are in motion but which always happen in
the same way either necessarily, or naturally, or from some other cause,
as the solstices or the sunrise.

Nor about those which are variable, as drought and rains; nor fortuitous
matters, as finding of treasure.

Nor in fact even about all human affairs; no Laced\E6monian, for instance,
deliberates as to the best course for the Scythian government to adopt;
because in such cases we have no power over the result.

But we do deliberate respecting such practical matters as are in our own
power (which are what are left after all our exclusions).

I have adopted this division because causes seem to be divisible into
nature, necessity, chance, and moreover intellect, and all human powers.

And as man in general deliberates about what man in general can effect,
so individuals do about such practical things as can be effected through
their own instrumentality.

[Sidenote: 1112b] Again, we do not deliberate respecting such arts or
sciences as are exact and independent: as, for instance, about written
characters, because we have no doubt how they should be formed; but we
do deliberate on all buch things as are usually done through our own
instrumentality, but not invariably in the same way; as, for instance,
about matters connected with the healing art, or with money-making; and,
again, more about piloting ships than gymnastic exercises, because the
former has been less exactly determined, and so forth; and more about
arts than sciences, because we more frequently doubt respecting the
former.

So then Deliberation takes place in such matters as are under general
laws, but still uncertain how in any given case they will issue,
_i.e._ in which there is some indefiniteness; and for great matters we
associate coadjutors in counsel, distrusting our ability to settle them
alone.

Further, we deliberate not about Ends, but Means to Ends. No physician,
for instance, deliberates whether he will cure, nor orator whether
he will persuade, nor statesman whether he will produce a good
constitution, nor in fact any man in any other function about his
particular End; but having set before them a certain End they look how
and through what means it may be accomplished: if there is a choice of
means, they examine further which are easiest and most creditable; or,
if there is but one means of accomplishing the object, then how it may
be through this, this again through what, till they come to the first
cause; and this will be the last found; for a man engaged in a process
of deliberation seems to seek and analyse, as a man, to solve a
problem, analyses the figure given him. And plainly not every search is
Deliberation, those in mathematics to wit, but every Deliberation is
a search, and the last step in the analysis is the first in the
constructive process. And if in the course of their search men come upon
an impossibility, they give it up; if money, for instance, be necessary,
but cannot be got: but if the thing appears possible they then attempt
to do it.

And by possible I mean what may be done through our own instrumentality
(of course what may be done through our friends is through our own
instrumentality in a certain sense, because the origination in such
cases rests with us). And the object of search is sometimes the
necessary instruments, sometimes the method of using them; and similarly
in the rest sometimes through what, and sometimes how or through what.

So it seems, as has been said, that Man is the originator of his
actions; and Deliberation has for its object whatever may be done
through one's own instrumentality, and the actions are with a view to
other things; and so it is, not the End, but the Means to Ends on which
Deliberation is employed.

[Sidenote: III3a]

Nor, again, is it employed on matters of detail, as whether the
substance before me is bread, or has been properly cooked; for these
come under the province of sense, and if a man is to be always
deliberating, he may go on _ad infinitum_.

Further, exactly the same matter is the object both of Deliberation
and Moral Choice; but that which is the object of Moral Choice is
thenceforward separated off and definite, because by object of Moral
Choice is denoted that which after Deliberation has been preferred to
something else: for each man leaves off searching how he shall do a
thing when he has brought the origination up to himself, _i.e_. to the
governing principle in himself, because it is this which makes the
choice. A good illustration of this is furnished by the old regal
constitutions which Homer drew from, in which the Kings would announce
to the commonalty what they had determined before.

Now since that which is the object of Moral Choice is something in our
own power, which is the object of deliberation and the grasping of the
Will, Moral Choice must be "a grasping after something in our own power
consequent upon Deliberation:" because after having deliberated we
decide, and then grasp by our Will in accordance with the result of our
deliberation.

Let this be accepted as a sketch of the nature and object of Moral
Choice, that object being "Means to Ends."

[Sidenote: IV] That Wish has for its object-matter the End, has been
already stated; but there are two opinions respecting it; some thinking
that its object is real good, others whatever impresses the mind with a
notion of good.

Now those who maintain that the object of Wish is real good are beset by
this difficulty, that what is wished for by him who chooses wrongly is
not really an object of Wish (because, on their theory, if it is an
object of wish, it must be good, but it is, in the case supposed, evil).
Those who maintain, on the contrary, that that which impresses the mind
with a notion of good is properly the object of Wish, have to meet this
difficulty, that there is nothing naturally an object of Wish but to
each individual whatever seems good to him; now different people have
different notions, and it may chance contrary ones.

But, if these opinions do not satisfy us, may we not say that,
abstractedly and as a matter of objective truth, the really good is the
object of Wish, but to each individual whatever impresses his mind with
the notion of good. And so to the good man that is an object of Wish
which is really and truly so, but to the bad man anything may be; just
as physically those things are wholesome to the healthy which are really
so, but other things to the sick. And so too of bitter and sweet, and
hot and heavy, and so on. For the good man judges in every instance
correctly, and in every instance the notion conveyed to his mind is the
true one.

For there are fair and pleasant things peculiar to, and so varying with,
each state; and perhaps the most distinguishing characteristic of the
good man is his seeing the truth in every instance, he being, in fact,
the rule and measure of these matters.

The multitude of men seem to be deceived by reason of pleasure, because
though it is not really a good it impresses their minds with the notion
of goodness, so they choose what is pleasant as good and avoid pain as
an evil.

Now since the End is the object of Wish, and the means to the End of
Deliberation and Moral Choice, the actions regarding these matters
must be in the way of Moral Choice, _i.e._ voluntary: but the acts of
working out the virtues are such actions, and therefore Virtue is in our
power.

And so too is Vice: because wherever it is in our power to do it is also
in our power to forbear doing, and _vice vers\E2_: therefore if the doing
(being in a given case creditable) is in our power, so too is the
forbearing (which is in the same case discreditable), and _vice vers\E2_.

But if it is in our power to do and to forbear doing what is creditable
or the contrary, and these respectively constitute the being good or
bad, then the being good or vicious characters is in our power.

As for the well-known saying, "No man voluntarily is wicked or
involuntarily happy," it is partly true, partly false; for no man is
happy against his will, of course, but wickedness is voluntary. Or must
we dispute the statements lately made, and not say that Man is the
originator or generator of his actions as much as of his children?

But if this is matter of plain manifest fact, and we cannot refer our
actions to any other originations beside those in our own power, those
things must be in our own power, and so voluntary, the originations of
which are in ourselves.

Moreover, testimony seems to be borne to these positions both privately
by individuals, and by law-givers too, in that they chastise and punish
those who do wrong (unless they do so on compulsion, or by reason of
ignorance which is not self-caused), while they honour those who act
rightly, under the notion of being likely to encourage the latter and
restrain the former. But such things as are not in our own power, _i.e._
not voluntary, no one thinks of encouraging us to do, knowing it to be
of no avail for one to have been persuaded not to be hot (for instance),
or feel pain, or be hungry, and so forth, because we shall have those
sensations all the same.

And what makes the case stronger is this: that they chastise for the
very fact of ignorance, when it is thought to be self-caused; to the
drunken, for instance, penalties are double, because the origination in
such case lies in a man's own self: for he might have helped getting
drunk, and this is the cause of his ignorance.

[Sidenote: III4_a_] Again, those also who are ignorant of legal
regulations which they are bound to know, and which are not hard to
know, they chastise; and similarly in all other cases where neglect is
thought to be the cause of the ignorance, under the notion that it was
in their power to prevent their ignorance, because they might have paid
attention.

But perhaps a man is of such a character that he cannot attend to such
things: still men are themselves the causes of having become such
characters by living carelessly, and also of being unjust or destitute
of self-control, the former by doing evil actions, the latter by
spending their time in drinking and such-like; because the particular
acts of working form corresponding characters, as is shown by those who
are practising for any contest or particular course of action, for such
men persevere in the acts of working.

As for the plea, that a man did not know that habits are produced
from separate acts of working, we reply, such ignorance is a mark of
excessive stupidity.

Furthermore, it is wholly irrelevant to say that the man who acts
unjustly or dissolutely does not _wish_ to attain the habits of these
vices: for if a man wittingly does those things whereby he must become
unjust he is to all intents and purposes unjust voluntarily; but he
cannot with a wish cease to be unjust and become just. For, to take the
analogous case, the sick man cannot with a wish be well again, yet in
a supposable case he is voluntarily ill because he has produced his
sickness by living intemperately and disregarding his physicians. There
was a time then when he might have helped being ill, but now he has let
himself go he cannot any longer; just as he who has let a stone out of
his hand cannot recall it, and yet it rested with him to aim and throw
it, because the origination was in his power. Just so the unjust man,
and he who has lost all self-control, might originally have helped being
what they are, and so they are voluntarily what they are; but now that
they are become so they no longer have the power of being otherwise.

And not only are mental diseases voluntary, but the bodily are so in
some men, whom we accordingly blame: for such as are naturally deformed
no one blames, only such as are so by reason of want of exercise, and
neglect: and so too of weakness and maiming: no one would think of
upbraiding, but would rather compassionate, a man who is blind by
nature, or from disease, or from an accident; but every one would blame
him who was so from excess of wine, or any other kind of intemperance.
It seems, then, that in respect of bodily diseases, those which depend
on ourselves are censured, those which do not are not censured; and if
so, then in the case of the mental disorders, those which are censured
must depend upon ourselves.

[Sidenote: III4_b_] But suppose a man to say, "that (by our own
admission) all men aim at that which conveys to their minds an
impression of good, and that men have no control over this impression,
but that the End impresses each with a notion correspondent to his own
individual character; that to be sure if each man is in a way the cause
of his own moral state, so he will be also of the kind of impression he
receives: whereas, if this is not so, no one is the cause to himself of
doing evil actions, but he does them by reason of ignorance of the true
End, supposing that through their means he will secure the chief good.
Further, that this aiming at the End is no matter of one's own choice,
but one must be born with a power of mental vision, so to speak, whereby
to judge fairly and choose that which is really good; and he is blessed
by nature who has this naturally well: because it is the most important
thing and the fairest, and what a man cannot get or learn from another
but will have such as nature has given it; and for this to be so given
well and fairly would be excellence of nature in the highest and truest
sense."

If all this be true, how will Virtue be a whit more voluntary than Vice?
Alike to the good man and the bad, the End gives its impression and is
fixed by nature or howsoever you like to say, and they act so and so,
referring everything else to this End.

Whether then we suppose that the End impresses each man's mind with
certain notions not merely by nature, but that there is somewhat also
dependent on himself; or that the End is given by nature, and yet Virtue
is voluntary because the good man does all the rest voluntarily, Vice
must be equally so; because his own agency equally attaches to the bad
man in the actions, even if not in the selection of the End.

If then, as is commonly said, the Virtues are voluntary (because we at
least co-operate in producing our moral states, and we assume the End
to be of a certain kind according as we are ourselves of certain
characters), the Vices must be voluntary also, because the cases are
exactly similar.

Well now, we have stated generally respecting the Moral Virtues, the
genus (in outline), that they are mean states, and that they are habits,
and how they are formed, and that they are of themselves calculated to
act upon the circumstances out of which they were formed, and that they
are in our own power and voluntary, and are to be done so as right
Reason may direct.

[Sidenote: III5_a_] But the particular actions and the habits are not
voluntary in the same sense; for of the actions we are masters from
beginning to end (supposing of course a knowledge of the particular
details), but only of the origination of the habits, the addition by
small particular accessions not being cognisiable (as is the case with
sicknesses): still they are voluntary because it rested with us to use
our circumstances this way or that.

Here we will resume the particular discussion of the Moral Virtues,
and say what they are, what is their object-matter, and how they stand
respectively related to it: of course their number will be thereby
shown. First, then, of Courage. Now that it is a mean state, in respect
of fear and boldness, has been already said: further, the objects of our
fears are obviously things fearful or, in a general way of statement,
evils; which accounts for the common definition of fear, viz.
"expectation of evil."

Of course we fear evils of all kinds: disgrace, for instance, poverty,
disease, desolateness, death; but not all these seem to be the
object-matter of the Brave man, because there are things which to fear
is right and noble, and not to fear is base; disgrace, for example,
since he who fears this is a good man and has a sense of honour, and he
who does not fear it is shameless (though there are those who call him
Brave by analogy, because he somewhat resembles the Brave man who agrees
with him in being free from fear); but poverty, perhaps, or disease, and
in fact whatever does not proceed from viciousness, nor is attributable
to his own fault, a man ought not to fear: still, being fearless in
respect of these would not constitute a man Brave in the proper sense of
the term.

Yet we do apply the term in right of the similarity of the cases; for
there are men who, though timid in the dangers of war, are liberal men
and are stout enough to face loss of wealth.

And, again, a man is not a coward for fearing insult to his wife or
children, or envy, or any such thing; nor is he a Brave man for being
bold when going to be scourged.

What kind of fearful things then do constitute the object-matter of the
Brave man? first of all, must they not be the greatest, since no man is
more apt to withstand what is dreadful. Now the object of the greatest
dread is death, because it is the end of all things, and the dead man is
thought to be capable neither of good nor evil. Still it would seem
that the Brave man has not for his object-matter even death in every
circumstance; on the sea, for example, or in sickness: in what
circumstances then? must it not be in the most honourable? now such is
death in war, because it is death in the greatest and most honourable
danger; and this is confirmed by the honours awarded in communities, and
by monarchs.

He then may be most properly denominated Brave who is fearless in
respect of honourable death and such sudden emergencies as threaten
death; now such specially are those which arise in the course of war.

[Sidenote: 1115b] It is not meant but that the Brave man will be
fearless also on the sea (and in sickness), but not in the same way as
sea-faring men; for these are light-hearted and hopeful by reason of
their experience, while landsmen though Brave are apt to give themselves
up for lost and shudder at the notion of such a death: to which it
should be added that Courage is exerted in circumstances which admit
of doing something to help one's self, or in which death would be
honourable; now neither of these requisites attach to destruction by
drowning or sickness.



VII


Again, fearful is a term of relation, the same thing not being so to
all, and there is according to common parlance somewhat so fearful as to
be beyond human endurance: this of course would be fearful to every
man of sense, but those objects which are level to the capacity of
man differ in magnitude and admit of degrees, so too the objects of
confidence or boldness.

Now the Brave man cannot be frighted from his propriety (but of course
only so far as he is man); fear such things indeed he will, but he will
stand up against them as he ought and as right reason may direct, with a
view to what is honourable, because this is the end of the virtue.

Now it is possible to fear these things too much, or too little, or
again to fear what is not really fearful as if it were such. So the
errors come to be either that a man fears when he ought not to fear at
all, or that he fears in an improper way, or at a wrong time, and so
forth; and so too in respect of things inspiring confidence. He is
Brave then who withstands, and fears, and is bold, in respect of right
objects, from a right motive, in right manner, and at right times:
since the Brave man suffers or acts as he ought and as right reason may
direct.

Now the end of every separate act of working is that which accords
with the habit, and so to the Brave man Courage; which is honourable;
therefore such is also the End, since the character of each is
determined by the End.

So honour is the motive from which the Brave man withstands things
fearful and performs the acts which accord with Courage.

Of the characters on the side of Excess, he who exceeds in utter absence
of fear has no appropriate name (I observed before that many states have
none), but he would be a madman or inaccessible to pain if he feared
nothing, neither earthquake, nor the billows, as they tell of the Celts.

He again who exceeds in confidence in respect of things fearful is rash.
He is thought moreover to be a braggart, and to advance unfounded claims
to the character of Brave: the relation which the Brave man really bears
to objects of fear this man wishes to appear to bear, and so imitates
him in whatever points he can; for this reason most of them exhibit a
curious mixture of rashness and cowardice; because, affecting rashness
in these circumstances, they do not withstand what is truly fearful.

[Sidenote: III6_a_] The man moreover who exceeds in feeling fear is a
coward, since there attach to him the circumstances of fearing wrong
objects, in wrong ways, and so forth. He is deficient also in feeling
confidence, but he is most clearly seen as exceeding in the case of
pains; he is a fainthearted kind of man, for he fears all things: the
Brave man is just the contrary, for boldness is the property of the
light-hearted and hopeful.

So the coward, the rash, and the Brave man have exactly the same
object-matter, but stand differently related to it: the two
first-mentioned respectively exceed and are deficient, the last is in a
mean state and as he ought to be. The rash again are precipitate, and,
being eager before danger, when actually in it fall away, while the
Brave are quick and sharp in action, but before are quiet and composed.

Well then, as has been said, Courage is a mean state in respect of
objects inspiring boldness or fear, in the circumstances which have been
stated, and the Brave man chooses his line and withstands danger either
because to do so is honourable, or because not to do so is base. But
dying to escape from poverty, or the pangs of love, or anything that is
simply painful, is the act not of a Brave man but of a coward; because
it is mere softness to fly from what is toilsome, and the suicide braves
the terrors of death not because it is honourable but to get out of the
reach of evil.


VIII

Courage proper is somewhat of the kind I have described, but there are
dispositions, differing in five ways, which also bear in common parlance
the name of Courage.

We will take first that which bears most resemblance to the true, the
Courage of Citizenship, so named because the motives which are thought
to actuate the members of a community in braving danger are the
penalties and disgrace held out by the laws to cowardice, and the
dignities conferred on the Brave; which is thought to be the reason
why those are the bravest people among whom cowards are visited with
disgrace and the Brave held in honour.

Such is the kind of Courage Homer exhibits in his characters; Diomed and
Hector for example. The latter says,

 "Polydamas will be the first to fix
  Disgrace upon me."

Diomed again,

 "For Hector surely will hereafter say,
  Speaking in Troy, Tydides by my hand"--

This I say most nearly resembles the Courage before spoken of, because
it arises from virtue, from a feeling of shame, and a desire of what is
noble (that is, of honour), and avoidance of disgrace which is base. In
the same rank one would be inclined to place those also who act under
compulsion from their commanders; yet are they really lower, because not
a sense of honour but fear is the motive from which they act, and what
they seek to avoid is not that which is base but that which is simply
painful: commanders do in fact compel their men sometimes, as Hector
says (to quote Homer again),

  "But whomsoever I shall find cowering afar from the fight,
  The teeth of dogs he shall by no means escape."

[Sidenote: III6_h_] Those commanders who station staunch troops by
doubtful ones, or who beat their men if they flinch, or who draw their
troops up in line with the trenches, or other similar obstacles,
in their rear, do in effect the same as Hector, for they all use
compulsion.

But a man is to be Brave, not on compulsion, but from a sense of honour.

In the next place, Experience and Skill in the various particulars is
thought to be a species of Courage: whence Socrates also thought that
Courage was knowledge.

This quality is exhibited of course by different men under different
circumstances, but in warlike matters, with which we are now concerned,
it is exhibited by the soldiers ("the regulars"): for there are, it
would seem, many things in war of no real importance which these have
been constantly used to see; so they have a show of Courage because
other people are not aware of the real nature of these things. Then
again by reason of their skill they are better able than any others to
inflict without suffering themselves, because they are able to use their
arms and have such as are most serviceable both with a view to offence
and defence: so that their case is parallel to that of armed men
fighting with unarmed or trained athletes with amateurs, since in
contests of this kind those are the best fighters, not who are the
bravest men, but who are the strongest and are in the best condition.

In fact, the regular troops come to be cowards whenever the danger is
greater than their means of meeting it; supposing, for example, that
they are inferior in numbers and resources: then they are the first to
fly, but the mere militia stand and fall on the ground (which as you
know really happened at the Herm\E6um), for in the eyes of these flight
was disgraceful and death preferable to safety bought at such a price:
while "the regulars" originally went into the danger under a notion
of their own superiority, but on discovering their error they took to
flight, having greater fear of death than of disgrace; but this is not
the feeling of the Brave man.

Thirdly, mere Animal Spirit is sometimes brought under the term Courage:
they are thought to be Brave who are carried on by mere Animal Spirit,
as are wild beasts against those who have wounded them, because in fact
the really Brave have much Spirit, there being nothing like it for going
at danger of any kind; whence those frequent expressions in Homer,
"infused strength into his spirit," "roused his strength and spirit," or
again, "and keen strength in his nostrils," "his blood boiled:" for all
these seem to denote the arousing and impetuosity of the Animal Spirit.

[Sidenote: III7_a_] Now they that are truly Brave act from a sense of
honour, and this Animal Spirit co-operates with them; but wild beasts
from pain, that is because they have been wounded, or are frightened;
since if they are quietly in their own haunts, forest or marsh, they do
not attack men. Surely they are not Brave because they rush into danger
when goaded on by pain and mere Spirit, without any view of the danger:
else would asses be Brave when they are hungry, for though beaten they
will not then leave their pasture: profligate men besides do many bold
actions by reason of their lust. We may conclude then that they are not
Brave who are goaded on to meet danger by pain and mere Spirit; but
still this temper which arises from Animal Spirit appears to be most
natural, and would be Courage of the true kind if it could have added
to it moral choice and the proper motive. So men also are pained by a
feeling of anger, and take pleasure in revenge; but they who fight from
these causes may be good fighters, but they are not truly Brave (in
that they do not act from a sense of honour, nor as reason directs, but
merely from the present feeling), still they bear some resemblance to
that character.

Nor, again, are the Sanguine and Hopeful therefore Brave: since their
boldness in dangers arises from their frequent victories over numerous
foes. The two characters are alike, however, in that both are confident;
but then the Brave are so from the afore-mentioned causes, whereas these
are so from a settled conviction of their being superior and not likely
to suffer anything in return (they who are intoxicated do much the
same, for they become hopeful when in that state); but when the event
disappoints their expectations they run away: now it was said to be the
character of a Brave man to withstand things which are fearful to man
or produce that impression, because it is honourable so to do and the
contrary is dishonourable.

For this reason it is thought to be a greater proof of Courage to be
fearless and undisturbed under the pressure of sudden fear than under
that which may be anticipated, because Courage then comes rather from a
fixed habit, or less from preparation: since as to foreseen dangers a
man might take his line even from calculation and reasoning, but in
those which are sudden he will do so according to his fixed habit of
mind.

Fifthly and lastly, those who are acting under Ignorance have a show
of Courage and are not very far from the Hopeful; but still they are
inferior inasmuch as they have no opinion of themselves; which the
others have, and therefore stay and contest a field for some little
time; but they who have been deceived fly the moment they know things to
be otherwise than they supposed, which the Argives experienced when they
fell on the Laced\E6monians, taking them for the men of Sicyon. We have
described then what kind of men the Brave are, and what they who are
thought to be, but are not really, Brave.

[Sidenote: IX]

It must be remarked, however, that though Courage has for its
object-matter boldness and fear it has not both equally so, but objects
of fear much more than the former; for he that under pressure of these
is undisturbed and stands related to them as he ought is better entitled
to the name of Brave than he who is properly affected towards objects
of confidence. So then men are termed Brave for withstanding painful
things.

It follows that Courage involves pain and is justly praised, since it
is a harder matter to withstand things that are painful than to abstain
from such as are pleasant.

[Sidenote: 1117_b_]

It must not be thought but that the End and object of Courage is
pleasant, but it is obscured by the surrounding circumstances: which
happens also in the gymnastic games; to the boxers the End is pleasant
with a view to which they act, I mean the crown and the honours; but the
receiving the blows they do is painful and annoying to flesh and blood,
and so is all the labour they have to undergo; and, as these drawbacks
are many, the object in view being small appears to have no pleasantness
in it.

If then we may say the same of Courage, of course death and wounds must
be painful to the Brave man and against his will: still he endures these
because it is honourable so to do or because it is dishonourable not to
do so. And the more complete his virtue and his happiness so much the
more will he be pained at the notion of death: since to such a man as
he is it is best worth while to live, and he with full consciousness is
deprived of the greatest goods by death, and this is a painful idea. But
he is not the less Brave for feeling it to be so, nay rather it may be
he is shown to be more so because he chooses the honour that may be
reaped in war in preference to retaining safe possession of these other
goods. The fact is that to act with pleasure does not belong to all the
virtues, except so far as a man realises the End of his actions.

But there is perhaps no reason why not such men should make the best
soldiers, but those who are less truly Brave but have no other good to
care for: these being ready to meet danger and bartering their lives
against small gain.

Let thus much be accepted as sufficient on the subject of Courage; the
true nature of which it is not difficult to gather, in outline at least,
from what has been said.

[Sidenote: X]

Next let us speak of Perfected Self-Mastery, which seems to claim the
next place to Courage, since these two are the Excellences of the
Irrational part of the Soul.

That it is a mean state, having for its object-matter Pleasures, we have
already said (Pains being in fact its object-matter in a less degree
and dissimilar manner), the state of utter absence of self-control has
plainly the same object-matter; the next thing then is to determine what
kind of Pleasures.

Let Pleasures then be understood to be divided into mental and bodily:
instances of the former being love of honour or of learning: it being
plain that each man takes pleasure in that of these two objects which he
has a tendency to like, his body being no way affected but rather his
intellect. Now men are not called perfectly self-mastering or wholly
destitute of self-control in respect of pleasures of this class: nor in
fact in respect of any which are not bodily; those for example who love
to tell long stories, and are prosy, and spend their days about
mere chance matters, we call gossips but not wholly destitute of
self-control, nor again those who are pained at the loss of money or
friends.

[Sidenote: 1118_a_]

It is bodily Pleasures then which are the object-matter of Perfected
Self-Mastery, but not even all these indifferently: I mean, that they
who take pleasure in objects perceived by the Sight, as colours, and
forms, and painting, are not denominated men of Perfected Self-Mastery,
or wholly destitute of self-control; and yet it would seem that one may
take pleasure even in such objects, as one ought to do, or excessively,
or too little.

So too of objects perceived by the sense of Hearing; no one applies the
terms before quoted respectively to those who are excessively pleased
with musical tunes or acting, or to those who take such pleasure as they
ought.

Nor again to those persons whose pleasure arises from the sense
of Smell, except incidentally: I mean, we do not say men have no
self-control because they take pleasure in the scent of fruit, or
flowers, or incense, but rather when they do so in the smells of
unguents and sauces: since men destitute of self-control take pleasure
herein, because hereby the objects of their lusts are recalled to their
imagination (you may also see other men take pleasure in the smell of
food when they are hungry): but to take pleasure in such is a mark of
the character before named since these are objects of desire to him.

Now not even brutes receive pleasure in right of these senses, except
incidentally. I mean, it is not the scent of hares' flesh but the eating
it which dogs take pleasure in, perception of which pleasure is caused
by the sense of Smell. Or again, it is not the lowing of the ox but
eating him which the lion likes; but of the fact of his nearness the
lion is made sensible by the lowing, and so he appears to take pleasure
in this. In like manner, he has no pleasure in merely seeing or finding
a stag or wild goat, but in the prospect of a meal.

The habits of Perfect Self-Mastery and entire absence of self-control
have then for their object-matter such pleasures as brutes also share
in, for which reason they are plainly servile and brutish: they are
Touch and Taste.

But even Taste men seem to make little or no use of; for to the sense of
Taste belongs the distinguishing of flavours; what men do, in fact, who
are testing the quality of wines or seasoning "made dishes."

But men scarcely take pleasure at all in these things, at least those
whom we call destitute of self-control do not, but only in the actual
enjoyment which arises entirely from the sense of Touch, whether in
eating or in drinking, or in grosser lusts. This accounts for the wish
said to have been expressed once by a great glutton, "that his throat
had been formed longer than a crane's neck," implying that his pleasure
was derived from the Touch.

[Sidenote: 1118b] The sense then with which is connected the habit of
absence of self-control is the most common of all the senses, and this
habit would seem to be justly a matter of reproach, since it attaches to
us not in so far as we are men but in so far as we are animals. Indeed
it is brutish to take pleasure in such things and to like them best of
all; for the most respectable of the pleasures arising from the touch
have been set aside; those, for instance, which occur in the course of
gymnastic training from the rubbing and the warm bath: because the touch
of the man destitute of self-control is not indifferently of _any_ part
of the body but only of particular parts.

XI

Now of lusts or desires some are thought to be universal, others
peculiar and acquired; thus desire for food is natural since every one
who really needs desires also food, whether solid or liquid, or both
(and, as Homer says, the man in the prime of youth needs and desires
intercourse with the other sex); but when we come to this or that
particular kind, then neither is the desire universal nor in all men is
it directed to the same objects. And therefore the conceiving of such
desires plainly attaches to us as individuals. It must be admitted,
however, that there is something natural in it: because different things
are pleasant to different men and a preference of some particular
objects to chance ones is universal. Well then, in the case of the
desires which are strictly and properly natural few men go wrong and all
in one direction, that is, on the side of too much: I mean, to eat and
drink of such food as happens to be on the table till one is overfilled
is exceeding in quantity the natural limit, since the natural desire
is simply a supply of a real deficiency. For this reason these men are
called belly-mad, as filling it beyond what they ought, and it is the
slavish who become of this character.

But in respect of the peculiar pleasures many men go wrong and in many
different ways; for whereas the term "fond of so and so" implies either
taking pleasure in wrong objects, or taking pleasure excessively, or as
the mass of men do, or in a wrong way, they who are destitute of all
self-control exceed in all these ways; that is to say, they take
pleasure in some things in which they ought not to do so (because they
are properly objects of detestation), and in such as it is right to take
pleasure in they do so more than they ought and as the mass of men do.

Well then, that excess with respect to pleasures is absence of
self-control, and blameworthy, is plain. But viewing these habits on the
side of pains, we find that a man is not said to have the virtue for
withstanding them (as in the case of Courage), nor the vice for not
withstanding them; but the man destitute of self-control is such,
because he is pained more than he ought to be at not obtaining things
which are pleasant (and thus his pleasure produces pain to him), and the
man of Perfected Self-Mastery is such in virtue of not being pained by
their absence, that is, by having to abstain from what is pleasant.

[Sidenote:III9a] Now the man destitute of self-control desires either
all pleasant things indiscriminately or those which are specially
pleasant, and he is impelled by his desire to choose these things in
preference to all others; and this involves pain, not only when he
misses the attainment of his objects but, in the very desiring them,
since all desire is accompanied by pain. Surely it is a strange case
this, being pained by reason of pleasure.

As for men who are defective on the side of pleasure, who take
less pleasure in things than they ought, they are almost imaginary
characters, because such absence of sensual perception is not natural to
man: for even the other animals distinguish between different kinds of
food, and like some kinds and dislike others. In fact, could a man be
found who takes no pleasure in anything and to whom all things are
alike, he would be far from being human at all: there is no name for
such a character because it is simply imaginary.

But the man of Perfected Self-Mastery is in the mean with respect to
these objects: that is to say, he neither takes pleasure in the things
which delight the vicious man, and in fact rather dislikes them, nor at
all in improper objects; nor to any great degree in any object of the
class; nor is he pained at their absence; nor does he desire them; or,
if he does, only in moderation, and neither more than he ought, nor at
improper times, and so forth; but such things as are conducive to health
and good condition of body, being also pleasant, these he will grasp at
in moderation and as he ought to do, and also such other pleasant things
as do not hinder these objects, and are not unseemly or disproportionate
to his means; because he that should grasp at such would be liking such
pleasures more than is proper; but the man of Perfected Self-Mastery
is not of this character, but regulates his desires by the dictates of
right reason.

XII

Now the vice of being destitute of all Self-Control seems to be more
truly voluntary than Cowardice, because pleasure is the cause of the
former and pain of the latter, and pleasure is an object of choice,
pain of avoidance. And again, pain deranges and spoils the natural
disposition of its victim, whereas pleasure has no such effect and is
more voluntary and therefore more justly open to reproach.

It is so also for the following reason; that it is easier to be inured
by habit to resist the objects of pleasure, there being many things of
this kind in life and the process of habituation being unaccompanied by
danger; whereas the case is the reverse as regards the objects of fear.

Again, Cowardice as a confirmed habit would seem to be voluntary in
a different way from the particular instances which form the habit;
because it is painless, but these derange the man by reason of pain so
that he throws away his arms and otherwise behaves himself unseemly,
for which reason they are even thought by some to exercise a power of
compulsion.

But to the man destitute of Self-Control the particular instances are on
the contrary quite voluntary, being done with desire and direct exertion
of the will, but the general result is less voluntary: since no man
desires to form the habit.

[Sidenote: 1119b]

The name of this vice (which signifies etymologically unchastened-ness)
we apply also to the faults of children, there being a certain
resemblance between the cases: to which the name is primarily applied,
and to which secondarily or derivatively, is not relevant to the present
subject, but it is evident that the later in point of time must get the
name from the earlier. And the metaphor seems to be a very good one;
for whatever grasps after base things, and is liable to great increase,
ought to be chastened; and to this description desire and the child
answer most truly, in that children also live under the direction of
desire and the grasping after what is pleasant is most prominently seen
in these.

Unless then the appetite be obedient and subjected to the governing
principle it will become very great: for in the fool the grasping after
what is pleasant is insatiable and undiscriminating; and every acting
out of the desire increases the kindred habit, and if the desires are
great and violent in degree they even expel Reason entirely; therefore
they ought to be moderate and few, and in no respect to be opposed
to Reason. Now when the appetite is in such a state we denominate it
obedient and chastened.

In short, as the child ought to live with constant regard to the orders
of its educator, so should the appetitive principle with regard to those
of Reason.

So then in the man of Perfected Self-Mastery, the appetitive principle
must be accordant with Reason: for what is right is the mark at which
both principles aim: that is to say, the man of perfected self-mastery
desires what he ought in right manner and at right times, which is
exactly what Reason directs. Let this be taken for our account of
Perfected Self-Mastery.




BOOK IV

I

We will next speak of Liberality. Now this is thought to be the mean
state, having for its object-matter Wealth: I mean, the Liberal man is
praised not in the circumstances of war, nor in those which constitute
the character of perfected self-mastery, nor again in judicial
decisions, but in respect of giving and receiving Wealth, chiefly the
former. By the term Wealth I mean "all those things whose worth is
measured by money."

Now the states of excess and defect in regard of Wealth are respectively
Prodigality and Stinginess: the latter of these terms we attach
invariably to those who are over careful about Wealth, but the former we
apply sometimes with a complex notion; that is to say, we give the name
to those who fail of self-control and spend money on the unrestrained
gratification of their passions; and this is why they are thought to be
most base, because they have many vices at once.

[Sidenote: 1120a]

It must be noted, however, that this is not a strict and proper use of
the term, since its natural etymological meaning is to denote him who
has one particular evil, viz. the wasting his substance: he is unsaved
(as the term literally denotes) who is wasting away by his own fault;
and this he really may be said to be; the destruction of his substance
is thought to be a kind of wasting of himself, since these things
are the means of living. Well, this is our acceptation of the term
Prodigality.

Again. Whatever things are for use may be used well or ill, and Wealth
belongs to this class. He uses each particular thing best who has the
virtue to whose province it belongs: so that he will use Wealth best
who has the virtue respecting Wealth, that is to say, the Liberal
man. Expenditure and giving are thought to be the using of money, but
receiving and keeping one would rather call the possessing of it. And so
the giving to proper persons is more characteristic of the Liberal man,
than the receiving from proper quarters and forbearing to receive
from the contrary. In fact generally, doing well by others is more
characteristic of virtue than being done well by, and doing things
positively honourable than forbearing to do things dishonourable;
and any one may see that the doing well by others and doing things
positively honourable attaches to the act of giving, but to that of
receiving only the being done well by or forbearing to do what is
dishonourable.

Besides, thanks are given to him who gives, not to him who merely
forbears to receive, and praise even more. Again, forbearing to receive
is easier than giving, the case of being too little freehanded with
one's own being commoner than taking that which is not one's own.

And again, it is they who give that are denominated Liberal, while they
who forbear to receive are commended, not on the score of Liberality but
of just dealing, while for receiving men are not, in fact, praised at
all.

And the Liberal are liked almost best of all virtuous characters,
because they are profitable to others, and this their profitableness
consists in their giving.

Furthermore: all the actions done in accordance with virtue are
honourable, and done from the motive of honour: and the Liberal man,
therefore, will give from a motive of honour, and will give rightly;
I mean, to proper persons, in right proportion, at right times, and
whatever is included in the term "right giving:" and this too with
positive pleasure, or at least without pain, since whatever is done in
accordance with virtue is pleasant or at least not unpleasant, most
certainly not attended with positive pain.

But the man who gives to improper people, or not from a motive of honour
but from some other cause, shall be called not Liberal but something
else. Neither shall he be so [Sidenote:1120b] denominated who does it
with pain: this being a sign that he would prefer his wealth to the
honourable action, and this is no part of the Liberal man's character;
neither will such an one receive from improper sources, because the so
receiving is not characteristic of one who values not wealth: nor again
will he be apt to ask, because one who does kindnesses to others does
not usually receive them willingly; but from proper sources (his own
property, for instance) he will receive, doing this not as honourable
but as necessary, that he may have somewhat to give: neither will he be
careless of his own, since it is his wish through these to help others
in need: nor will he give to chance people, that he may have wherewith
to give to those to whom he ought, at right times, and on occasions when
it is honourable so to do.

Again, it is a trait in the Liberal man's character even to exceed
very much in giving so as to leave too little for himself, it being
characteristic of such an one not to have a thought of self.

Now Liberality is a term of relation to a man's means, for the
Liberal-ness depends not on the amount of what is given but on the moral
state of the giver which gives in proportion to his means. There is then
no reason why he should not be the more Liberal man who gives the less
amount, if he has less to give out of.

Again, they are thought to be more Liberal who have inherited, not
acquired for themselves, their means; because, in the first place, they
have never experienced want, and next, all people love most their own
works, just as parents do and poets.

It is not easy for the Liberal man to be rich, since he is neither apt
to receive nor to keep but to lavish, and values not wealth for its own
sake but with a view to giving it away. Hence it is commonly charged
upon fortune that they who most deserve to be rich are least so. Yet
this happens reasonably enough; it is impossible he should have wealth
who does not take any care to have it, just as in any similar case.

Yet he will not give to improper people, nor at wrong times, and so on:
because he would not then be acting in accordance with Liberality, and
if he spent upon such objects, would have nothing to spend on those on
which he ought: for, as I have said before, he is Liberal who spends in
proportion to his means, and on proper objects, while he who does so
in excess is prodigal (this is the reason why we never call despots
prodigal, because it does not seem to be easy for them by their gifts
and expenditure to go beyond their immense possessions).

To sum up then. Since Liberality is a mean state in respect of the
giving and receiving of wealth, the Liberal man will give and spend on
proper objects, and in proper proportion, in great things and in small
alike, and all this with pleasure to himself; also he will receive from
right sources, and in right proportion: because, as the virtue is a mean
state in respect of both, he will do both as he ought, and, in fact,
upon proper giving follows the correspondent receiving, while that which
is not such is contrary to it. (Now those which follow one another come
to co-exist in the same person, those which are contraries plainly do
not.)

[Sidenote:1121a] Again, should it happen to him to spend money beyond
what is needful, or otherwise than is well, he will be vexed, but only
moderately and as he ought; for feeling pleasure and pain at right
objects, and in right manner, is a property of Virtue.

The Liberal man is also a good man to have for a partner in respect of
wealth: for he can easily be wronged, since he values not wealth, and
is more vexed at not spending where he ought to have done so than at
spending where he ought not, and he relishes not the maxim of Simonides.

But the Prodigal man goes wrong also in these points, for he is neither
pleased nor pained at proper objects or in proper manner, which will
become more plain as we proceed. We have said already that Prodigality
and Stinginess are respectively states of excess and defect, and this in
two things, giving and receiving (expenditure of course we class under
giving). Well now, Prodigality exceeds in giving and forbearing to
receive and is deficient in receiving, while Stinginess is deficient in
giving and exceeds in receiving, but it is in small things.

The two parts of Prodigality, to be sure, do not commonly go together;
it is not easy, I mean, to give to all if you receive from none, because
private individuals thus giving will soon find their means run short,
and such are in fact thought to be prodigal. He that should combine both
would seem to be no little superior to the Stingy man: for he may be
easily cured, both by advancing in years, and also by the want of means,
and he may come thus to the mean: he has, you see, already the _facts_
of the Liberal man, he gives and forbears to receive, only he does
neither in right manner or well. So if he could be wrought upon by
habituation in this respect, or change in any other way, he would be a
real Liberal man, for he will give to those to whom he should, and will
forbear to receive whence he ought not. This is the reason too why he is
thought not to be low in moral character, because to exceed in giving
and in forbearing to receive is no sign of badness or meanness, but only
of folly.

[Sidenote:1121b] Well then, he who is Prodigal in this fashion is
thought far superior to the Stingy man for the aforementioned reasons,
and also because he does good to many, but the Stingy man to no one,
not even to himself. But most Prodigals, as has been said, combine with
their other faults that of receiving from improper sources, and on this
point are Stingy: and they become grasping, because they wish to spend
and cannot do this easily, since their means soon run short and they are
necessitated to get from some other quarter; and then again, because
they care not for what is honourable, they receive recklessly, and from
all sources indifferently, because they desire to give but care not how
or whence. And for this reason their givings are not Liberal, inasmuch
as they are not honourable, nor purely disinterested, nor done in right
fashion; but they oftentimes make those rich who should be poor, and to
those who are quiet respectable kind of people they will give nothing,
but to flatterers, or those who subserve their pleasures in any way,
they will give much. And therefore most of them are utterly devoid
of self-restraint; for as they are open-handed they are liberal in
expenditure upon the unrestrained gratification of their passions, and
turn off to their pleasures because they do not live with reference to
what is honourable.

Thus then the Prodigal, if unguided, slides into these faults; but if he
could get care bestowed on him he might come to the mean and to what is
right.

Stinginess, on the contrary, is incurable: old age, for instance, and
incapacity of any kind, is thought to make people Stingy; and it is more
congenial to human nature than Prodigality, the mass of men being fond
of money rather than apt to give: moreover it extends far and has many
phases, the modes of stinginess being thought to be many. For as it
consists of two things, defect of giving and excess of receiving,
everybody does not have it entire, but it is sometimes divided, and one
class of persons exceed in receiving, the other are deficient in giving.
I mean those who are designated by such appellations as sparing,
close-fisted, niggards, are all deficient in giving; but other men's
property they neither desire nor are willing to receive, in some
instances from a real moderation and shrinking from what is base.

There are some people whose motive, either supposed or alleged, for
keeping their property is this, that they may never be driven to do
anything dishonourable: to this class belongs the skinflint, and every
one of similar character, so named from the excess of not-giving. Others
again decline to receive their neighbour's goods from a motive of fear;
their notion being that it is not easy to take other people's things
yourself without their taking yours: so they are content neither to
receive nor give.

[Sidenote:1122a] The other class again who are Stingy in respect of
receiving exceed in that they receive anything from any source; such as
they who work at illiberal employments, brothel keepers, and such-like,
and usurers who lend small sums at large interest: for all these receive
from improper sources, and improper amounts. Their common characteristic
is base-gaining, since they all submit to disgrace for the sake of gain
and that small; because those who receive great things neither whence
they ought, nor what they ought (as for instance despots who sack cities
and plunder temples), we denominate wicked, impious, and unjust, but not
Stingy.

Now the dicer and bath-plunderer and the robber belong to the class of
the Stingy, for they are given to base gain: both busy themselves and
submit to disgrace for the sake of gain, and the one class incur the
greatest dangers for the sake of their booty, while the others make gain
of their friends to whom they ought to be giving.

So both classes, as wishing to make gain from improper sources, are
given to base gain, and all such receivings are Stingy. And with good
reason is Stinginess called the contrary of Liberality: both because it
is a greater evil than Prodigality, and because men err rather in this
direction than in that of the Prodigality which we have spoken of as
properly and completely such.

Let this be considered as what we have to say respecting Liberality and
the contrary vices.

II

Next in order would seem to come a dissertation on Magnificence,
this being thought to be, like liberality, a virtue having for its
object-matter Wealth; but it does not, like that, extend to all
transactions in respect of Wealth, but only applies to such as are
expensive, and in these circumstances it exceeds liberality in respect
of magnitude, because it is (what the very name in Greek hints at)
fitting expense on a large scale: this term is of course relative: I
mean, the expenditure of equipping and commanding a trireme is not the
same as that of giving a public spectacle: "fitting" of course also is
relative to the individual, and the matter wherein and upon which he has
to spend. And a man is not denominated Magnificent for spending as he
should do in small or ordinary things, as, for instance,

  "Oft to the wandering beggar did I give,"

but for doing so in great matters: that is to say, the Magnificent man
is liberal, but the liberal is not thereby Magnificent. The falling
short of such a state is called Meanness, the exceeding it Vulgar
Profusion, Want of Taste, and so on; which are faulty, not because they
are on an excessive scale in respect of right objects but, because they
show off in improper objects, and in improper manner: of these we will
speak presently. The Magnificent man is like a man of skill, because he
can see what is fitting, and can spend largely in good taste; for, as
we said at the commencement, [Sidenote: 1122b] the confirmed habit is
determined by the separate acts of working, and by its object-matter.

Well, the expenses of the Magnificent man are great and fitting: such
also are his works (because this secures the expenditure being not great
merely, but befitting the work). So then the work is to be proportionate
to the expense, and this again to the work, or even above it: and the
Magnificent man will incur such expenses from the motive of honour, this
being common to all the virtues, and besides he will do it with pleasure
and lavishly; excessive accuracy in calculation being Mean. He will
consider also how a thing may be done most beautifully and fittingly,
rather, than for how much it may be done, and how at the least expense.

So the Magnificent man must be also a liberal man, because the liberal
man will also spend what he ought, and in right manner: but it is the
Great, that is to say tke large scale, which is distinctive of the
Magnificent man, the object-matter of liberality being the same, and
without spending more money than another man he will make the work more
magnificent. I mean, the excellence of a possession and of a work is not
the same: as a piece of property that thing is most valuable which is
worth most, gold for instance; but as a work that which is great and
beautiful, because the contemplation of such an object is admirable,
and so is that which is Magnificent. So the excellence of a work is
Magnificence on a large scale. There are cases of expenditure which we
call honourable, such as are dedicatory offerings to the gods, and the
furnishing their temples, and sacrifices, and in like manner everything
that has reference to the Deity, and all such public matters as are
objects of honourable ambition, as when men think in any case that it is
their duty to furnish a chorus for the stage splendidly, or fit out and
maintain a trireme, or give a general public feast.

Now in all these, as has been already stated, respect is had also to the
rank and the means of the man who is doing them: because they should be
proportionate to these, and befit not the work only but also the doer of
the work. For this reason a poor man cannot be a Magnificent man, since
he has not means wherewith to spend largely and yet becomingly; and if
he attempts it he is a fool, inasmuch as it is out of proportion and
contrary to propriety, whereas to be in accordance with virtue a thing
must be done rightly.

Such expenditure is fitting moreover for those to whom such things
previously belong, either through themselves or through their ancestors
or people with whom they are connected, and to the high-born or people
of high repute, and so on: because all these things imply greatness and
reputation.

So then the Magnificent man is pretty much as I have described him,
and Magnificence consists in such expenditures: because they are the
greatest and most honourable: [Sidenote:1123a] and of private ones such
as come but once for all, marriage to wit, and things of that kind; and
any occasion which engages the interest of the community in general, or
of those who are in power; and what concerns receiving and despatching
strangers; and gifts, and repaying gifts: because the Magnificent man
is not apt to spend upon himself but on the public good, and gifts are
pretty much in the same case as dedicatory offerings.

It is characteristic also of the Magnificent man to furnish his house
suitably to his wealth, for this also in a way reflects credit; and
again, to spend rather upon such works as are of long duration, these
being most honourable. And again, propriety in each case, because the
same things are not suitable to gods and men, nor in a temple and a
tomb. And again, in the case of expenditures, each must be great of its
kind, and great expense on a great object is most magnificent, that is
in any case what is great in these particular things.

There is a difference too between greatness of a work and greatness of
expenditure: for instance, a very beautiful ball or cup is magnificent
as a present to a child, while the price of it is small and almost
mean. Therefore it is characteristic of the Magnificent man to do
magnificently whatever he is about: for whatever is of this kind cannot
be easily surpassed, and bears a proper proportion to the expenditure.

Such then is the Magnificent man.

The man who is in the state of excess, called one of Vulgar Profusion,
is in excess because he spends improperly, as has been said. I mean in
cases requiring small expenditure he lavishes much and shows off out of
taste; giving his club a feast fit for a wedding-party, or if he has to
furnish a chorus for a comedy, giving the actors purple to wear in the
first scene, as did the Megarians. And all such things he will do, not
with a view to that which is really honourable, but to display his
wealth, and because he thinks he shall be admired for these things; and
he will spend little where he ought to spend much, and much where he
should spend little.

The Mean man will be deficient in every case, and even where he has
spent the most he will spoil the whole effect for want of some trifle;
he is procrastinating in all he does, and contrives how he may spend
the least, and does even that with lamentations about the expense, and
thinking that he does all things on a greater scale than he ought.

Of course, both these states are faulty, but they do not involve
disgrace because they are neither hurtful to others nor very unseemly.

III

The very name of Great-mindedness implies, that great things are its
object-matter; and we will first settle what kind of things. It makes no
difference, of course, whether we regard the moral state in the abstract
or as exemplified in an individual.

[Sidenote: 1123b] Well then, he is thought to be Great-minded who values
himself highly and at the same time justly, because he that does so
without grounds is foolish, and no virtuous character is foolish or
senseless. Well, the character I have described is Great-minded. The man
who estimates himself lowly, and at the same time justly, is modest; but
not Great-minded, since this latter quality implies greatness, just as
beauty implies a large bodily conformation while small people are neat
and well made but not beautiful.

Again, he who values himself highly without just grounds is a Vain
man: though the name must not be applied to every case of unduly
high self-estimation. He that values himself below his real worth is
Small-minded, and whether that worth is great, moderate, or small, his
own estimate falls below it. And he is the strongest case of this error
who is really a man of great worth, for what would he have done had his
worth been less?

The Great-minded man is then, as far as greatness is concerned, at
the summit, but in respect of propriety he is in the mean, because he
estimates himself at his real value (the other characters respectively
are in excess and defect). Since then he justly estimates himself at a
high, or rather at the highest possible rate, his character will have
respect specially to one thing: this term "rate" has reference of course
to external goods: and of these we should assume that to be the greatest
which we attribute to the gods, and which is the special object of
desire to those who are in power, and which is the prize proposed to the
most honourable actions: now honour answers to these descriptions, being
the greatest of external goods. So the Great-minded man bears himself as
he ought in respect of honour and dishonour. In fact, without need of
words, the Great-minded plainly have honour for their object-matter:
since honour is what the great consider themselves specially worthy of,
and according to a certain rate.

The Small-minded man is deficient, both as regards himself, and also
as regards the estimation of the Great-minded: while the Vain man is in
excess as regards himself, but does not get beyond the Great-minded
man. Now the Great-minded man, being by the hypothesis worthy of the
greatest things, must be of the highest excellence, since the better a
man is the more is he worth, and he who is best is worth the most: it
follows then, that to be truly Great-minded a man must be good,
and whatever is great in each virtue would seem to belong to the
Great-minded. It would no way correspond with the character of the
Great-minded to flee spreading his hands all abroad; nor to injure any
one; for with what object in view will he do what is base, in whose eyes
nothing is great? in short, if one were to go into particulars, the
Great-minded man would show quite ludicrously unless he were a good man:
he would not be in fact deserving of honour if he were a bad man, honour
being the prize of virtue and given to the good.

This virtue, then, of Great-mindedness seems to be a kind of ornament
of all the other virtues, in that it makes them better and cannot be
without them; and for this reason it is a hard matter to be really and
truly Great-minded; for it cannot be without thorough goodness and
nobleness of character.

[Sidenote:1124a] Honour then and dishonour are specially the
object-matter of the Great-minded man: and at such as is great, and
given by good men, he will be pleased moderately as getting his own, or
perhaps somewhat less for no honour can be quite adequate to perfect
virtue: but still he will accept this because they have nothing higher
to give him. But such as is given by ordinary people and on trifling
grounds he will entirely despise, because these do not come up to his
deserts: and dishonour likewise, because in his case there cannot be
just ground for it.

Now though, as I have said, honour is specially the object-matter of the
Great-minded man, I do not mean but that likewise in respect of wealth
and power, and good or bad fortune of every kind, he will bear himself
with moderation, fall out how they may, and neither in prosperity will
he be overjoyed nor in adversity will he be unduly pained. For not even
in respect of honour does he so bear himself; and yet it is the greatest
of all such objects, since it is the cause of power and wealth being
choiceworthy, for certainly they who have them desire to receive honour
through them. So to whom honour even is a small thing to him will all
other things also be so; and this is why such men are thought to be
supercilious.

It seems too that pieces of good fortune contribute to form this
character of Great-mindedness: I mean, the nobly born, or men of
influence, or the wealthy, are considered to be entitled to honour, for
they are in a position of eminence and whatever is eminent by good is
more entitled to honour: and this is why such circumstances dispose men
rather to Great-mindedness, because they receive honour at the hands of
some men.

Now really and truly the good man alone is entitled to honour; only if
a man unites in himself goodness with these external advantages he is
thought to be more entitled to honour: but they who have them without
also having virtue are not justified in their high estimate of
themselves, nor are they rightly denominated Great-minded; since perfect
virtue is one of the indispensable conditions to such & character.

[Sidenote:1124b] Further, such men become supercilious and insolent, it
not being easy to bear prosperity well without goodness; and not being
able to bear it, and possessed with an idea of their own superiority to
others, they despise them, and do just whatever their fancy prompts; for
they mimic the Great-minded man, though they are not like him, and they
do this in such points as they can, so without doing the actions which
can only flow from real goodness they despise others. Whereas the
Great-minded man despises on good grounds (for he forms his opinions
truly), but the mass of men do it at random.

Moreover, he is not a man to incur little risks, nor does he court
danger, because there are but few things he has a value for; but he will
incur great dangers, and when he does venture he is prodigal of his life
as knowing that there are terms on which it is not worth his while to
live. He is the sort of man to do kindnesses, but he is ashamed to
receive them; the former putting a man in the position of superiority,
the latter in that of inferiority; accordingly he will greatly overpay
any kindness done to him, because the original actor will thus be laid
under obligation and be in the position of the party benefited. Such men
seem likewise to remember those they have done kindnesses to, but not
those from whom they have received them: because he who has received is
inferior to him who has done the kindness and our friend wishes to be
superior; accordingly he is pleased to hear of his own kind acts but not
of those done to himself (and this is why, in Homer, Thetis does
not mention to Jupiter the kindnesses she had done him, nor did the
Laced\E6monians to the Athenians but only the benefits they had received).

Further, it is characteristic of the Great-minded man to ask favours not
at all, or very reluctantly, but to do a service very readily; and to
bear himself loftily towards the great or fortunate, but towards people
of middle station affably; because to be above the former is difficult
and so a grand thing, but to be above the latter is easy; and to be high
and mighty towards the former is not ignoble, but to do it towards those
of humble station would be low and vulgar; it would be like parading
strength against the weak.

And again, not to put himself in the way of honour, nor to go where
others are the chief men; and to be remiss and dilatory, except in the
case of some great honour or work; and to be concerned in few things,
and those great and famous. It is a property of him also to be open,
both in his dislikes and his likings, because concealment is a
consequent of fear. Likewise to be careful for reality rather than
appearance, and talk and act openly (for his contempt for others makes
him a bold man, for which same reason he is apt to speak the truth,
except where the principle of reserve comes in), but to be reserved
towards the generality of men.

[Sidenote: II25a] And to be unable to live with reference to any other
but a friend; because doing so is servile, as may be seen in that all
flatterers are low and men in low estate are flatterers. Neither is his
admiration easily excited, because nothing is great in his eyes; nor
does he bear malice, since remembering anything, and specially wrongs,
is no part of Great-mindedness, but rather overlooking them; nor does he
talk of other men; in fact, he will not speak either of himself or of
any other; he neither cares to be praised himself nor to have others
blamed; nor again does he praise freely, and for this reason he is
not apt to speak ill even of his enemies except to show contempt and
insolence.

And he is by no means apt to make laments about things which cannot be
helped, or requests about those which are trivial; because to be thus
disposed with respect to these things is consequent only upon real
anxiety about them. Again, he is the kind of man to acquire what
is beautiful and unproductive rather than what is productive and
profitable: this being rather the part of an independent man. Also slow
motion, deep-toned voice, and deliberate style of speech, are thought to
be characteristic of the Great-minded man: for he who is earnest about
few things is not likely to be in a hurry, nor he who esteems nothing
great to be very intent: and sharp tones and quickness are the result of
these.

This then is my idea of the Great-minded man; and he who is in the
defect is a Small-minded man, he who is in the excess a Vain man.
However, as we observed in respect of the last character we discussed,
these extremes are not thought to be vicious exactly, but only mistaken,
for they do no harm.

The Small-minded man, for instance, being really worthy of good deprives
himself of his deserts, and seems to have somewhat faulty from not
having a sufficiently high estimate of his own desert, in fact from
self-ignorance: because, but for this, he would have grasped after what
he really is entitled to, and that is good. Still such characters are
not thought to be foolish, but rather laggards. But the having such
an opinion of themselves seems to have a deteriorating effect on the
character: because in all cases men's aims are regulated by their
supposed desert, and thus these men, under a notion of their own want of
desert, stand aloof from honourable actions and courses, and similarly
from external goods.

But the Vain are foolish and self-ignorant, and that palpably: because
they attempt honourable things, as though they were worthy, and then
they are detected. They also set themselves off, by dress, and carriage,
and such-like things, and desire that their good circumstances may
be seen, and they talk of them under the notion of receiving
honour thereby. Small-mindedness rather than Vanity is opposed to
Great-mindedness, because it is more commonly met with and is worse.

[Sidenote:1125b] Well, the virtue of Great-mindedness has for its object
great Honour, as we have said: and there seems to be a virtue having
Honour also for its object (as we stated in the former book), which may
seem to bear to Great-mindedness the same relation that Liberality does
to Magnificence: that is, both these virtues stand aloof from what is
great but dispose us as we ought to be disposed towards moderate and
small matters. Further: as in giving and receiving of wealth there is
a mean state, an excess, and a defect, so likewise in grasping after
Honour there is the more or less than is right, and also the doing so
from right sources and in right manner.

For we blame the lover of Honour as aiming at Honour more than he ought,
and from wrong sources; and him who is destitute of a love of Honour as
not choosing to be honoured even for what is noble. Sometimes again we
praise the lover of Honour as manly and having a love for what is noble,
and him who has no love for it as being moderate and modest (as we
noticed also in the former discussion of these virtues).

It is clear then that since "Lover of so and so" is a term capable of
several meanings, we do not always denote the same quality by the term
"Lover of Honour;" but when we use it as a term of commendation we
denote more than the mass of men are; when for blame more than a man
should be.

And the mean state having no proper name the extremes seem to dispute
for it as unoccupied ground: but of course where there is excess and
defect there must be also the mean. And in point of fact, men do grasp
at Honour more than they should, and less, and sometimes just as they
ought; for instance, this state is praised, being a mean state in regard
of Honour, but without any appropriate name. Compared with what is
called Ambition it shows like a want of love for Honour, and compared
with this it shows like Ambition, or compared with both, like both
faults: nor is this a singular case among the virtues. Here the
extreme characters appear to be opposed, because the mean has no name
appropriated to it.


V

Meekness is a mean state, having for its object-matter Anger: and as the
character in the mean has no name, and we may almost say the same of the
extremes, we give the name of Meekness (leaning rather to the defect,
which has no name either) to the character in the mean.

The excess may be called an over-aptness to Anger: for the passion is
Anger, and the producing causes many and various. Now he who is angry at
what and with whom he ought, and further, in right manner and time, and
for proper length of time, is praised, so this Man will be Meek since
Meekness is praised. For the notion represented by the term Meek man is
the being imperturbable, and not being led away by passion, but being
angry in that manner, and at those things, and for that length of time,
which Reason may direct. This character however is thought to err rather
on [Sidenote:1126a] the side of defect, inasmuch as he is not apt to
take revenge but rather to make allowances and forgive. And the defect,
call it Angerlessness or what you will, is blamed: I mean, they who are
not angry at things at which they ought to be angry are thought to be
foolish, and they who are angry not in right manner, nor in right time,
nor with those with whom they ought; for a man who labours under this
defect is thought to have no perception, nor to be pained, and to have
no tendency to avenge himself, inasmuch as he feels no anger: now to
bear with scurrility in one's own person, and patiently see one's own
friends suffer it, is a slavish thing.

As for the excess, it occurs in all forms; men are angry with those with
whom, and at things with which, they ought not to be, and more than they
ought, and too hastily, and for too great a length of time. I do not
mean, however, that these are combined in any one person: that would
in fact be impossible, because the evil destroys itself, and if it is
developed in its full force it becomes unbearable.

Now those whom we term the Passionate are soon angry, and with people
with whom and at things at which they ought not, and in an excessive
degree, but they soon cool again, which is the best point about them.
And this results from their not repressing their anger, but repaying
their enemies (in that they show their feeings by reason of their
vehemence), and then they have done with it.

The Choleric again are excessively vehement, and are angry at
everything, and on every occasion; whence comes their Greek name
signifying that their choler lies high.

The Bitter-tempered are hard to reconcile and keep their anger for
a long while, because they repress the feeling: but when they have
revenged themselves then comes a lull; for the vengeance destroys their
anger by producing pleasure in lieu of pain. But if this does not happen
they keep the weight on their minds: because, as it does not show
itself, no one attempts to reason it away, and digesting anger within
one's self takes time. Such men are very great nuisances to themselves
and to their best friends.

Again, we call those Cross-grained who are angry at wrong objects, and
in excessive degree, and for too long a time, and who are not appeased
without vengeance or at least punishing the offender.

To Meekness we oppose the excess rather than the defect, because it is
of more common occurrence: for human nature is more disposed to take
than to forgo revenge. And the Cross-grained are worse to live with
[than they who are too phlegmatic].

Now, from what has been here said, that is also plain which was said
before. I mean, it is no easy matter to define how, and with what
persons, and at what kind of things, and how long one ought to be
angry, and up to what point a person is right or is wrong. For he that
transgresses the strict rule only a little, whether on the side of
too much or too little, is not blamed: sometimes we praise those who
[Sidenote:1126b] are deficient in the feeling and call them Meek,
sometimes we call the irritable Spirited as being well qualified for
government. So it is not easy to lay down, in so many words, for what
degree or kind of transgression a man is blameable: because the decision
is in particulars, and rests therefore with the Moral Sense. Thus much,
however, is plain, that the mean state is praiseworthy, in virtue of
which we are angry with those with whom, and at those things with which,
we ought to be angry, and in right manner, and so on; while the excesses
and defects are blameable, slightly so if only slight, more so if
greater, and when considerable very blameable.

It is clear, therefore, that the mean state is what we are to hold to.

This then is to be taken as our account of the various moral states
which have Anger for their object-matter.

VI

Next, as regards social intercourse and interchange of words and acts,
some men are thought to be Over-Complaisant who, with a view solely to
giving pleasure, agree to everything and never oppose, but think their
line is to give no pain to those they are thrown amongst: they, on
the other hand, are called Cross and Contentious who take exactly the
contrary line to these, and oppose in everything, and have no care at
all whether they give pain or not.

Now it is quite clear of course, that the states I have named are
blameable, and that the mean between them is praiseworthy, in virtue
of which a man will let pass what he ought as he ought, and also will
object in like manner. However, this state has no name appropriated, but
it is most like Friendship; since the man who exhibits it is just the
kind of man whom we would call the amiable friend, with the addition of
strong earnest affection; but then this is the very point in which it
differs from Friendship, that it is quite independent of any feeling or
strong affection for those among whom the man mixes: I mean, that he
takes everything as he ought, not from any feeling of love or hatred,
but simply because his natural disposition leads him to do so; he will
do it alike to those whom he does know and those whom he does not, and
those with whom he is intimate and those with whom he is not; only in
each case as propriety requires, because it is not fitting to care
alike for intimates and strangers, nor again to pain them alike.

It has been stated in a general way that his social intercourse will be
regulated by propriety, and his aim will be to avoid giving pain and to
contribute to pleasure, but with a constant reference to what is noble
and expedient.

His proper object-matter seems to be the pleasures and pains which arise
out of social intercourse, but whenever it is not honourable or even
hurtful to him to contribute to pleasure, in these instances he will run
counter and prefer to give pain.

Or if the things in question involve unseemliness to the doer, and this
not inconsiderable, or any harm, whereas his opposition will cause some
little pain, here he will not agree but will run counter.

[Sidenote:1127a] Again, he will regulate differently his intercourse
with great men and with ordinary men, and with all people according to
the knowledge he has of them; and in like manner, taking in any other
differences which may exist, giving to each his due, and in itself
preferring to give pleasure and cautious not to give pain, but still
guided by the results, I mean by what is noble and expedient according
as they preponderate.

Again, he will inflict trifling pain with a view to consequent pleasure.

Well, the man bearing the mean character is pretty well such as I have
described him, but he has no name appropriated to him: of those who try
to give pleasure, the man who simply and disinterestedly tries to be
agreeable is called Over-Complaisant, he who does it with a view to
secure some profit in the way of wealth, or those things which wealth
may procure, is a Flatterer: I have said before, that the man who is
"always non-content" is Cross and Contentious. Here the extremes have
the appearance of being opposed to one another, because the mean has no
appropriate name.



VII

The mean state which steers clear of Exaggeration has pretty much the
same object-matter as the last we described, and likewise has no name
appropriated to it. Still it may be as well to go over these states:
because, in the first place, by a particular discussion of each we shall
be better acquainted with the general subject of moral character, and
next we shall be the more convinced that the virtues are mean states by
seeing that this is universally the case.

In respect then of living in society, those who carry on this
intercourse with a view to pleasure and pain have been already spoken
of; we will now go on to speak of those who are True or False, alike in
their words and deeds and in the claims which they advance.

Now the Exaggerator is thought to have a tendency to lay claim to things
reflecting credit on him, both when they do not belong to him at all and
also in greater degree than that in which they really do: whereas the
Reserved man, on the contrary, denies those which really belong to
him or else depreciates them, while the mean character being a
Plain-matter-of-fact person is Truthful in life and word, admitting
the existence of what does really belong to him and making it neither
greater nor less than the truth.

It is possible of course to take any of these lines either with or
without some further view: but in general men speak, and act, and live,
each according to his particular character and disposition, unless
indeed a man is acting from any special motive.

Now since falsehood is in itself low and blameable, while truth is noble
and praiseworthy, it follows that the Truthful man (who is also in the
mean) is praiseworthy, and the two who depart from strict truth are both
blameable, but especially the Exaggerator.

We will now speak of each, and first of the Truthful man: I call him
Truthful, because we are not now meaning the man who is true in his
agreements nor in such matters as amount to justice or injustice (this
would come within the [Sidenote:1127b] province of a different virtue),
but, in such as do not involve any such serious difference as this, the
man we are describing is true in life and word simply because he is in a
certain moral state.

And he that is such must be judged to be a good man: for he that has a
love for Truth as such, and is guided by it in matters indifferent, will
be so likewise even more in such as are not indifferent; for surely he
will have a dread of falsehood as base, since he shunned it even in
itself: and he that is of such a character is praiseworthy, yet he leans
rather to that which is below the truth, this having an appearance of
being in better taste because exaggerations are so annoying.

As for the man who lays claim to things above what really belongs to him
_without_ any special motive, he is like a base man because he would
not otherwise have taken pleasure in falsehood, but he shows as a fool
rather than as a knave. But if a man does this _with_ a special motive,
suppose for honour or glory, as the Braggart does, then he is not
so very blameworthy, but if, directly or indirectly, for pecuniary
considerations, he is more unseemly.

Now the Braggart is such not by his power but by his purpose, that is to
say, in virtue of his moral state, and because he is a man of a certain
kind; just as there are liars who take pleasure in falsehood for its
own sake while others lie from a desire of glory or gain. They who
exaggerate with a view to glory pretend to such qualities as are
followed by praise or highest congratulation; they who do it with a view
to gain assume those which their neighbours can avail themselves of,
and the absence of which can be concealed, as a man's being a skilful
soothsayer or physician; and accordingly most men pretend to such things
and exaggerate in this direction, because the faults I have mentioned
are in them.

The Reserved, who depreciate their own qualities, have the appearance of
being more refined in their characters, because they are not thought to
speak with a view to gain but to avoid grandeur: one very common trait
in such characters is their denying common current opinions, as Socrates
used to do. There are people who lay claim falsely to small things and
things the falsity of their pretensions to which is obvious; these are
called Factotums and are very despicable.

This very Reserve sometimes shows like Exaggeration; take, for instance,
the excessive plainness of dress affected by the Lacedaemonians: in
fact, both excess and the extreme of deficiency partake of the nature of
Exaggeration. But they who practise Reserve in moderation, and in cases
in which the truth is not very obvious and plain, give an impression of
refinement. Here it is the Exaggerator (as being the worst character)
who appears to be opposed to the Truthful Man.

VIII

[Sidenote:II28a] Next, as life has its pauses and in them admits of
pastime combined with Jocularity, it is thought that in this respect
also there is a kind of fitting intercourse, and that rules may be
prescribed as to the kind of things one should say and the manner of
saying them; and in respect of hearing likewise (and there will be a
difference between the saying and hearing such and such things). It is
plain that in regard to these things also there will be an excess and
defect and a mean.

Now they who exceed in the ridiculous are judged to be Buffoons and
Vulgar, catching at it in any and every way and at any cost, and aiming
rather at raising laughter than at saying what is seemly and at avoiding
to pain the object of their wit. They, on the other hand, who would not
for the world make a joke themselves and are displeased with such as do
are thought to be Clownish and Stern. But they who are Jocular in good
taste are denominated by a Greek term expressing properly ease of
movement, because such are thought to be, as one may say, motions of the
moral character; and as bodies are judged of by their motions so too are
moral characters.

Now as the ridiculous lies on the surface, and the majority of men take
more pleasure than they ought in Jocularity and Jesting, the Buffoons
too get this name of Easy Pleasantry, as if refined and gentlemanlike;
but that they differ from these, and considerably too, is plain from
what has been said.

One quality which belongs to the mean state is Tact: it is
characteristic of a man of Tact to say and listen to such things as are
fit for a good man and a gentleman to say and listen to: for there are
things which are becoming for such a one to say and listen to in the way
of Jocularity, and there is a difference between the Jocularity of the
Gentleman and that of the Vulgarian; and again, between that of the
educated and uneducated man. This you may see from a comparison of the
Old and New Comedy: in the former obscene talk made the fun; in the
latter it is rather innuendo: and this is no slight difference _as
regards decency_.

Well then, are we to characterise him who jests well by his saying what
is becoming a gentleman, or by his avoiding to pain the object of his
wit, or even by his giving him pleasure? or will not such a definition
be vague, since different things are hateful and pleasant to different
men?

Be this as it may, whatever he says such things will he also listen to,
since it is commonly held that a man will do what he will bear to hear:
this must, however, be limited; a man will not do quite all that he will
hear: because jesting is a species of scurrility and there are some
points of scurrility forbidden by law; it may be certain points of
jesting should have been also so forbidden. So then the refined and
gentlemanlike man will bear himself thus as being a law to himself. Such
is the mean character, whether denominated the man of Tact or of Easy
Pleasantry.

But the Buffoon cannot resist the ridiculous, sparing neither himself
nor any one else so that he can but raise his laugh, saying things of
such kind as no man of refinement would say and some which he would not
even tolerate if said by others in his hearing. [Sidenote:1128b] The
Clownish man is for such intercourse wholly useless: inasmuch as
contributing nothing jocose of his own he is savage with all who do.

Yet some pause and amusement in life are generally judged to be
indispensable.

The three mean states which have been described do occur in life, and
the object-matter of all is interchange of words and deeds. They differ,
in that one of them is concerned with truth, and the other two with the
pleasurable: and of these two again, the one is conversant with
the jocosities of life, the other with all other points of social
intercourse.

IX

To speak of Shame as a Virtue is incorrect, because it is much more like
a feeling than a moral state. It is defined, we know, to be "a kind of
fear of disgrace," and its effects are similar to those of the fear of
danger, for they who feel Shame grow red and they who fear death turn
pale. So both are evidently in a way physical, which is thought to be a
mark of a feeling rather than a moral state.

Moreover, it is a feeling not suitable to every age, but only to youth:
we do think that the young should be Shamefaced, because since they live
at the beck and call of passion they do much that is wrong and Shame
acts on them as a check. In fact, we praise such young men as are
Shamefaced, but no one would ever praise an old man for being given
to it, inasmuch as we hold that he ought not to do things which cause
Shame; for Shame, since it arises at low bad actions, does not at all
belong to the good man, because such ought not to be done at all: nor
does it make any difference to allege that some things are disgraceful
really, others only because they are thought so; for neither should be
done, so that a man ought not to be in the position of feeling Shame. In
truth, to be such a man as to do anything disgraceful is the part of a
faulty character. And for a man to be such that he would feel Shame if
he should do anything disgraceful, and to think that this constitutes
him a good man, is absurd: because Shame is felt at voluntary actions
only, and a good man will never voluntarily do what is base.

True it is, that Shame may be good on a certain supposition, as "if a
man should do such things, he would feel Shame:" but then the Virtues
are good in themselves, and not merely in supposed cases. And, granted
that impudence and the not being ashamed to do what is disgraceful is
base, it does not the more follow that it is good for a man to do such
things and feel Shame.

Nor is Self-Control properly a Virtue, but a kind of mixed state:
however, all about this shall be set forth in a future Book.




BOOK V

[Sidenote:1129a] Now the points for our inquiry in respect of Justice
and Injustice are, what kind of actions are their object-matter, and
what kind of a mean state Justice is, and between what points the
abstract principle of it, i.e. the Just, is a mean. And our inquiry
shall be, if you please, conducted in the same method as we have
observed in the foregoing parts of this treatise.

We see then that all men mean by the term Justice a moral state such
that in consequence of it men have the capacity of doing what is
just, and actually do it, and wish it: similarly also with respect to
Injustice, a moral state such that in consequence of it men do unjustly
and wish what is unjust: let us also be content then with these as a
ground-work sketched out.

I mention the two, because the same does not hold with regard to States
whether of mind or body as with regard to Sciences or Faculties: I mean
that whereas it is thought that the same Faculty or Science embraces
contraries, a State will not: from health, for instance, not the
contrary acts are done but the healthy ones only; we say a man walks
healthily when he walks as the healthy man would.

However, of the two contrary states the one may be frequently known from
the other, and oftentimes the states from their subject-matter: if it be
seen clearly what a good state of body is, then is it also seen what a
bad state is, and from the things which belong to a good state of body
the good state itself is seen, and _vice versa_. If, for instance,
the good state is firmness of flesh it follows that the bad state is
flabbiness of flesh; and whatever causes firmness of flesh is connected
with the good state. It follows moreover in general, that if of two
contrary terms the one is used in many senses so also will the other be;
as, for instance, if "the Just," then also "the Unjust." Now Justice and
Injustice do seem to be used respectively in many senses, but, because
the line of demarcation between these is very fine and minute, it
commonly escapes notice that they are thus used, and it is not plain
and manifest as where the various significations of terms are widely
different for in these last the visible difference is great, for
instance, the word [Greek: klehis] is used equivocally to denote the
bone which is under the neck of animals and the instrument with which
people close doors.

Let it be ascertained then in how many senses the term "Unjust man" is
used. Well, he who violates the law, and he who is a grasping man, and
the unequal man, are all thought to be Unjust and so manifestly the Just
man will be, the man who acts according to law, and the equal man "The
Just" then will be the lawful and the equal, and "the Unjust" the
unlawful and the unequal.

[Sidenote:1129b] Well, since the Unjust man is also a grasping man, he
will be so, of course, with respect to good things, but not of every
kind, only those which are the subject-matter of good and bad fortune
and which are in themselves always good but not always to the
individual. Yet men pray for and pursue these things: this they should
not do but pray that things which are in the abstract good may be so
also to them, and choose what is good for themselves.

But the Unjust man does not always choose actually the greater part, but
even sometimes the less; as in the case of things which are simply evil:
still, since the less evil is thought to be in a manner a good and the
grasping is after good, therefore even in this case he is thought to be
a grasping man, i.e. one who strives for more good than fairly falls to
his share: of course he is also an unequal man, this being an inclusive
and common term.

We said that the violator of Law is Unjust, and the keeper of the Law
Just: further, it is plain that all Lawful things are in a manner
Just, because by Lawful we understand what have been defined by the
legislative power and each of these we say is Just. The Laws too give
directions on all points, aiming either at the common good of all, or
that of the best, or that of those in power (taking for the standard
real goodness or adopting some other estimate); in one way we mean by
Just, those things which are apt to produce and preserve happiness and
its ingredients for the social community.

Further, the Law commands the doing the deeds not only of the brave man
(as not leaving the ranks, nor flying, nor throwing away one's arms),
but those also of the perfectly self-mastering man, as abstinence from
adultery and wantonness; and those of the meek man, as refraining from
striking others or using abusive language: and in like manner in respect
of the other virtues and vices commanding some things and forbidding
others, rightly if it is a good law, in a way somewhat inferior if it is
one extemporised.

Now this Justice is in fact perfect Virtue, yet not simply so but as
exercised towards one's neighbour: and for this reason Justice is
thought oftentimes to be the best of the Virtues, and

  "neither Hesper nor the Morning-star
  So worthy of our admiration:"

and in a proverbial saying we express the same;

  "All virtue is in Justice comprehended."

And it is in a special sense perfect Virtue because it is the practice
of perfect Virtue. And perfect it is because he that has it is able to
practise his virtue towards his neighbour and not merely on himself; I
mean, there are many who can practise virtue in the regulation of their
own personal conduct who are wholly unable to do it in transactions with
[Sidenote:1130a] their neighbour. And for this reason that saying of
Bias is thought to be a good one,

  "Rule will show what a man is;"

for he who bears Rule is necessarily in contact with others, i.e. in a
community. And for this same reason Justice alone of all the Virtues is
thought to be a good to others, because it has immediate relation to
some other person, inasmuch as the Just man does what is advantageous to
another, either to his ruler or fellow-subject. Now he is the basest
of men who practises vice not only in his own person but towards his
friends also; but he the best who practises virtue not merely in his
own person but towards his neighbour, for this is a matter of some
difficulty.

However, Justice in this sense is not a part of Virtue but is
co-extensive with Virtue; nor is the Injustice which answers to it a
part of Vice but co-extensive with Vice. Now wherein Justice in this
sense differs from Virtue appears from what has been said: it is the
same really, but the point of view is not the same: in so far as it has
respect to one's neighbour it is Justice, in so far as it is such and
such a moral state it is simply Virtue.

II

But the object of our inquiry is Justice, in the sense in which it is
a part of Virtue (for there is such a thing, as we commonly say), and
likewise with respect to particular Injustice. And of the existence of
this last the following consideration is a proof: there are many vices
by practising which a man acts unjustly, of course, but does not grasp
at more than his share of good; if, for instance, by reason of cowardice
he throws away his shield, or by reason of ill-temper he uses abusive
language, or by reason of stinginess does not give a friend pecuniary
assistance; but whenever he does a grasping action, it is often in the
way of none of these vices, certainly not in all of them, still in
the way of some vice or other (for we blame him), and in the way of
Injustice. There is then some kind of Injustice distinct from that
co-extensive with Vice and related to it as a part to a whole, and some
"Unjust" related to that which is co-extensive with violation of the law
as a part to a whole.

Again, suppose one man seduces a man's wife with a view to gain and
actually gets some advantage by it, and another does the same from
impulse of lust, at an expense of money and damage; this latter will be
thought to be rather destitute of self-mastery than a grasping man, and
the former Unjust but not destitute of self-mastery: now why? plainly
because of his gaining.

Again, all other acts of Injustice we refer to some particular
depravity, as, if a man commits adultery, to abandonment to his
passions; if he deserts his comrade, to cowardice; if he strikes
another, to anger: but if he gains by the act to no other vice than to
Injustice.

[Sidenote:1131b] Thus it is clear that there is a kind of Injustice
different from and besides that which includes all Vice, having the same
name because the definition is in the same genus; for both have their
force in dealings with others, but the one acts upon honour, or wealth,
or safety, or by whatever one name we can include all these things, and
is actuated by pleasure attendant on gain, while the other acts upon all
things which constitute the sphere of the good man's action.

Now that there is more than one kind of Justice, and that there is one
which is distinct from and besides that which is co-extensive with,
Virtue, is plain: we must next ascertain what it is, and what are its
characteristics.

Well, the Unjust has been divided into the unlawful and the unequal, and
the Just accordingly into the lawful and the equal: the aforementioned
Injustice is in the way of the unlawful. And as the unequal and the more
are not the same, but differing as part to whole (because all more is
unequal, but not all unequal more), so the Unjust and the Injustice we
are now in search of are not the same with, but other than, those before
mentioned, the one being the parts, the other the wholes; for this
particular Injustice is a part of the Injustice co-extensive with Vice,
and likewise this Justice of the Justice co-extensive with Virtue.
So that what we have now to speak of is the particular Justice and
Injustice, and likewise the particular Just and Unjust.

Here then let us dismiss any further consideration of the Justice
ranking as co-extensive with Virtue (being the practice of Virtue in all
its bearings towards others), and of the co-relative Injustice (being
similarly the practice of Vice). It is clear too, that we must separate
off the Just and the Unjust involved in these: because one may pretty
well say that most lawful things are those which naturally result in
action from Virtue in its fullest sense, because the law enjoins the
living in accordance with each Virtue and forbids living in accordance
with each Vice. And the producing causes of Virtue in all its bearings
are those enactments which have been made respecting education for
society.

By the way, as to individual education, in respect of which a man is
simply good without reference to others, whether it is the province of
[Greek: politikhae] or some other science we must determine at a
future time: for it may be it is not the same thing to be a good man and
a good citizen in every case.

Now of the Particular Justice, and the Just involved in it, one species
is that which is concerned in the distributions of honour, or wealth, or
such other things as are to be shared among the members of the social
community (because in these one man as compared with another may have
either an equal or an unequal share), and the other is that which is
Corrective in the various transactions between man and man.

[Sidenote: 1131a] And of this latter there are two parts: because of
transactions some are voluntary and some involuntary; voluntary, such as
follow; selling, buying, use, bail, borrowing, deposit, hiring: and this
class is called voluntary because the origination of these transactions
is voluntary.

The involuntary again are either such as effect secrecy; as theft,
adultery, poisoning, pimping, kidnapping of slaves, assassination, false
witness; or accompanied with open violence; as insult, bonds, death,
plundering, maiming, foul language, slanderous abuse.

III

Well, the unjust man we have said is unequal, and the abstract "Unjust"
unequal: further, it is plain that there is some mean of the unequal,
that is to say, the equal or exact half (because in whatever action
there is the greater and the less there is also the equal, i.e. the
exact half). If then the Unjust is unequal the Just is equal, which all
must allow without further proof: and as the equal is a mean the Just
must be also a mean. Now the equal implies two terms at least: it
follows then that the Just is both a mean and equal, and these to
certain persons; and, in so far as it is a mean, between certain things
(that is, the greater and the less), and, so far as it is equal, between
two, and in so far as it is just it is so to certain persons. The Just
then must imply four terms at least, for those to which it is just are
two, and the terms representing the things are two.

And there will be the same equality between the terms representing the
persons, as between those representing the things: because as the latter
are to one another so are the former: for if the persons are not equal
they must not have equal shares; in fact this is the very source of all
the quarrelling and wrangling in the world, when either they who are
equal have and get awarded to them things not equal, or being not equal
those things which are equal. Again, the necessity of this equality of
ratios is shown by the common phrase "according to rate," for all agree
that the Just in distributions ought to be according to some rate:
but what that rate is to be, all do not agree; the democrats are for
freedom, oligarchs for wealth, others for nobleness of birth, and the
aristocratic party for virtue.

The Just, then, is a certain proportionable thing. For proportion does
not apply merely to number in the abstract, but to number generally,
since it is equality of ratios, and implies four terms at least (that
this is the case in what may be called discrete proportion is plain and
obvious, but it is true also in continual proportion, for this uses the
one [Sidenote: 1131b] term as two, and mentions it twice; thus A:B:C may
be expressed A:B::B:C. In the first, B is named twice; and so, if, as
in the second, B is actually written twice, the proportionals will be
four): and the Just likewise implies four terms at the least, and the
ratio between the two pair of terms is the same, because the persons and
the things are divided similarly. It will stand then thus, A:B::C:D, and
then permutando A:C::B:D, and then (supposing C and D to represent the
things) A+C:B+D::A:B. The distribution in fact consisting in putting
together these terms thus: and if they are put together so as to
preserve this same ratio, the distribution puts them together justly. So
then the joining together of the first and third and second and fourth
proportionals is the Just in the distribution, and this Just is the
mean relatively to that which violates the proportionate, for
the proportionate is a mean and the Just is proportionate. Now
mathematicians call this kind of proportion geometrical: for in
geometrical proportion the whole is to the whole as each part to each
part. Furthermore this proportion is not continual, because the person
and thing do not make up one term.

The Just then is this proportionate, and the Unjust that which violates
the proportionate; and so there comes to be the greater and the less:
which in fact is the case in actual transactions, because he who acts
unjustly has the greater share and he who is treated unjustly has the
less of what is good: but in the case of what is bad this is reversed:
for the less evil compared with the greater comes to be reckoned for
good, because the less evil is more choiceworthy than the greater, and
what is choiceworthy is good, and the more so the greater good.

This then is the one species of the Just.

IV

And the remaining one is the Corrective, which arises in voluntary as
well as involuntary transactions. Now this just has a different form
from the aforementioned; for that which is concerned in distribution of
common property is always according to the aforementioned proportion: I
mean that, if the division is made out of common property, the
shares will bear the same proportion to one another as the original
contributions did: and the Unjust which is opposite to this Just is that
which violates the proportionate.

But the Just which arises in transactions between men is an equal in a
certain sense, and the Unjust an unequal, only not in the way of that
proportion but of arithmetical. [Sidenote: 1132a ] Because it makes no
difference whether a robbery, for instance, is committed by a good man
on a bad or by a bad man on a good, nor whether a good or a bad man has
committed adultery: the law looks only to the difference created by the
injury and treats the men as previously equal, where the one does and
the other suffers injury, or the one has done and the other suffered
harm. And so this Unjust, being unequal, the judge endeavours to reduce
to equality again, because really when the one party has been wounded
and the other has struck him, or the one kills and the other dies, the
suffering and the doing are divided into unequal shares; well, the judge
tries to restore equality by penalty, thereby taking from the gain.

For these terms gain and loss are applied to these cases, though perhaps
the term in some particular instance may not be strictly proper, as
gain, for instance, to the man who has given a blow, and loss to him who
has received it: still, when the suffering has been estimated, the one
is called loss and the other gain.

And so the equal is a mean between the more and the less, which
represent gain and loss in contrary ways (I mean, that the more of good
and the less of evil is gain, the less of good and the more of evil is
loss): between which the equal was stated to be a mean, which equal we
say is Just: and so the Corrective Just must be the mean between loss
and gain. And this is the reason why, upon a dispute arising, men have
recourse to the judge: going to the judge is in fact going to the Just,
for the judge is meant to be the personification of the Just. And men
seek a judge as one in the mean, which is expressed in a name given by
some to judges ([Greek: mesidioi], or middle-men) under the notion that
if they can hit on the mean they shall hit on the Just. The Just is then
surely a mean since the judge is also.

So it is the office of a judge to make things equal, and the line, as it
were, having been unequally divided, he takes from the greater part that
by which it exceeds the half, and adds this on to the less. And when the
whole is divided into two exactly equal portions then men say they have
their own, when they have gotten the equal; and the equal is a mean
between the greater and the less according to arithmetical equality.

This, by the way, accounts for the etymology of the term by which we
in Greek express the ideas of Just and Judge; ([Greek: dikaion] quasi
[Greek: dichaion], that is in two parts, and [Greek: dikastaes] quasi
[Greek: dichastaes], he who divides into two parts). For when from one
of two equal magnitudes somewhat has been taken and added to the other,
this latter exceeds the former by twice that portion: if it had been
merely taken from the former and not added to the latter, then the
latter would [Sidenote:1132b] have exceeded the former only by that one
portion; but in the other case, the greater exceeds the mean by one, and
the mean exceeds also by one that magnitude from which the portion was
taken. By this illustration, then, we obtain a rule to determine what
one ought to take from him who has the greater, and what to add to him
who has the less. The excess of the mean over the less must be added to
the less, and the excess of the greater over the mean be taken from the
greater.

Thus let there be three straight lines equal to one another. From one of
them cut off a portion, and add as much to another of them. The whole
line thus made will exceed the remainder of the first-named line, by
twice the portion added, and will exceed the untouched line by that
portion. And these terms loss and gain are derived from voluntary
exchange: that is to say, the having more than what was one's own is
called gaining, and the having less than one's original stock is called
losing; for instance, in buying or selling, or any other transactions
which are guaranteed by law: but when the result is neither more nor
less, but exactly the same as there was originally, people say they have
their own, and neither lose nor gain.

So then the Just we have been speaking of is a mean between loss and
gain arising in involuntary transactions; that is, it is the having the
same after the transaction as one had before it took place.

[Sidenote: V] There are people who have a notion that Reciprocation is
simply just, as the Pythagoreans said: for they defined the Just simply
and without qualification as "That which reciprocates with another." But
this simple Reciprocation will not fit on either to the Distributive
Just, or the Corrective (and yet this is the interpretation they put
on the Rhadamanthian rule of Just, If a man should suffer what he hath
done, then there would be straightforward justice"), for in many
cases differences arise: as, for instance, suppose one in authority
has struck a man, he is not to be struck in turn; or if a man has
struck one in authority, he must not only be struck but punished also.
And again, the voluntariness or involuntariness of actions makes a
great difference.

[Sidenote: II33_a_] But in dealings of exchange such a principle of
Justice as this Reciprocation forms the bond of union, but then it must
be Reciprocation according to proportion and not exact equality, because
by proportionate reciprocity of action the social community is held
together, For either Reciprocation of evil is meant, and if this be
not allowed it is thought to be a servile condition of things: or else
Reciprocation of good, and if this be not effected then there is no
admission to participation which is the very bond of their union.

And this is the moral of placing the Temple of the Graces ([Greek:
charites]) in the public streets; to impress the notion that there may
be requital, this being peculiar to [Greek: charis] because a man ought
to requite with a good turn the man who has done him a favour and then
to become himself the originator of another [Greek: charis], by doing
him a favour.

Now the acts of mutual giving in due proportion may be represented
by the diameters of a parallelogram, at the four angles of which the
parties and their wares are so placed that the side connecting the
parties be opposite to that connecting the wares, and each party be
connected by one side with his own ware, as in the accompanying diagram.

[Illustration: Builder_Shoemaker House_Shoes.]

The builder is to receive from the shoemaker of his ware, and to give
him of his own: if then there be first proportionate equality, and
_then_ the Reciprocation takes place, there will be the just result
which we are speaking of: if not, there is not the equal, nor will the
connection stand: for there is no reason why the ware of the one may not
be better than that of the other, and therefore before the exchange is
made they must have been equalised. And this is so also in the other
arts: for they would have been destroyed entirely if there were not a
correspondence in point of quantity and quality between the producer and
the consumer. For, we must remember, no dealing arises between two of
the same kind, two physicians, for instance; but say between a physician
and agriculturist, or, to state it generally, between those who are
different and not equal, but these of course must have been equalised
before the exchange can take place.

It is therefore indispensable that all things which can be exchanged
should be capable of comparison, and for this purpose money has come
in, and comes to be a kind of medium, for it measures all things and so
likewise the excess and defect; for instance, how many shoes are equal
to a house or a given quantity of food. As then the builder to the
shoemaker, so many shoes must be to the house (or food, if instead of a
builder an agriculturist be the exchanging party); for unless there is
this proportion there cannot be exchange or dealing, and this proportion
cannot be unless the terms are in some way equal; hence the need, as was
stated above, of some one measure of all things. Now this is really
and truly the Demand for them, which is the common bond of all such
dealings. For if the parties were not in want at all or not similarly of
one another's wares, there would either not be any exchange, or at least
not the same.

And money has come to be, by general agreement, a representative of
Demand: and the account of its Greek name [Greek: nomisma] is this, that
it is what it is not naturally but by custom or law ([Greek: nomos]),
and it rests with us to change its value, or make it wholly useless.

[Sidenote: 1113b] Very well then, there will be Reciprocation when
the terms have been equalised so as to stand in this proportion;
Agriculturist : Shoemaker : : wares of Shoemaker : wares of
Agriculturist; but you must bring them to this form of proportion when
they exchange, otherwise the one extreme will combine both exceedings of
the mean: but when they have exactly their own then they are equal and
have dealings, because the same equality can come to be in their case.
Let A represent an agriculturist, C food, B a shoemaker, D his wares
equalised with A's. Then the proportion will be correct, A:B::C:D; _now_
Reciprocation will be practicable, if it were not, there would have been
no dealing.

Now that what connects men in such transactions is Demand, as being some
one thing, is shown by the fact that, when either one does not want the
other or neither want one another, they do not exchange at all: whereas
they do when one wants what the other man has, wine for instance, giving
in return corn for exportation.

And further, money is a kind of security to us in respect of exchange
at some future time (supposing that one wants nothing now that we shall
have it when we do): the theory of money being that whenever one brings
it one can receive commodities in exchange: of course this too is liable
to depreciation, for its purchasing power is not always the same,
but still it is of a more permanent nature than the commodities it
represents. And this is the reason why all things should have a price
set upon them, because thus there may be exchange at any time, and if
exchange then dealing. So money, like a measure, making all things
commensurable equalises them: for if there was not exchange there would
not have been dealing, nor exchange if there were not equality, nor
equality if there were not the capacity of being commensurate: it
is impossible that things so greatly different should be really
commensurate, but we can approximate sufficiently for all practical
purposes in reference to Demand. The common measure must be some one
thing, and also from agreement (for which reason it is called [Greek:
nomisma]), for this makes all things commensurable: in fact, all things
are measured by money. Let B represent ten min\E6, A a house worth five
min\E6, or in other words half B, C a bed worth 1/10th of B: it is clear
then how many beds are equal to one house, namely, five.

It is obvious also that exchange was thus conducted before the existence
of money: for it makes no difference whether you give for a house five
beds or the price of five beds. We have now said then what the abstract
Just and Unjust are, and these having been defined it is plain that
just acting is a mean between acting unjustly and being acted unjustly
towards: the former being equivalent to having more, and the latter to
having less.

But Justice, it must be observed, is a mean state not after the same
manner as the forementioned virtues, but because it aims at producing
the mean, while Injustice occupies _both_ the extremes.

[Sidenote: 1134_a_] And Justice is the moral state in virtue of which
the just man is said to have the aptitude for practising the Just in
the way of moral choice, and for making division between _, himself and
another, or between two other men, not so as to give to himself the
greater and to his neighbour the less share of what is choiceworthy and
contrariwise of what is hurtful, but what is proportionably equal, and
in like manner when adjudging the rights of two other men.

Injustice is all this with respect to the Unjust: and since the Unjust
is excess or defect of what is good or hurtful respectively, in
violation of the proportionate, therefore Injustice is both excess and
defect because it aims at producing excess and defect; excess, that is,
in a man's own case of what is simply advantageous, and defect of what
is hurtful: and in the case of other men in like manner generally
speaking, only that the proportionate is violated not always in one
direction as before but whichever way it happens in the given case. And
of the Unjust act the less is being acted unjustly towards, and the
greater the acting unjustly towards others.

Let this way of describing the nature of Justice and Injustice, and
likewise the Just and the Unjust generally, be accepted as sufficient.

[Sidenote: VI] Again, since a man may do unjust acts and not yet have
formed a character of injustice, the question arises whether a man is
unjust in each particular form of injustice, say a thief, or adulterer,
or robber, by doing acts of a given character.

We may say, I think, that this will not of itself make any difference; a
man may, for instance, have had connection with another's wife, knowing
well with whom he was sinning, but he may have done it not of deliberate
choice but from the impulse of passion: of course he acts unjustly, but
he has not necessarily formed an unjust character: that is, he may have
stolen yet not be a thief; or committed an act of adultery but still not
be an adulterer, and so on in other cases which might be enumerated.

Of the relation which Reciprocation bears to the Just we have already
spoken: and here it should be noticed that the Just which we are
investigating is both the Just in the abstract and also as exhibited in
Social Relations, which latter arises in the case of those who live in
communion with a view to independence and who are free and equal either
proportionately or numerically.

It follows then that those who are not in this position have not among
themselves the Social Just, but still Just of some kind and resembling
that other. For Just implies mutually acknowledged law, and law the
possibility of injustice, for adjudication is the act of distinguishing
between the Just and the Unjust.

And among whomsoever there is the possibility of injustice among these
there is that of acting unjustly; but it does not hold conversely that
injustice attaches to all among whom there is the possibility of acting
unjustly, since by the former we mean giving one's self the larger share
of what is abstractedly good and the less of what is abstractedly evil.

[Sidenote: 134_b_] This, by the way, is the reason why we do not allow
a man to govern, but Principle, because a man governs for himself and
comes to be a despot: but the office of a ruler is to be guardian of the
Just and therefore of the Equal. Well then, since he seems to have no
peculiar personal advantage, supposing him a Just man, for in this case
he does not allot to himself the larger share of what is abstractedly
good unless it falls to his share proportionately (for which reason he
really governs for others, and so Justice, men say, is a good not to
one's self so much as to others, as was mentioned before), therefore
some compensation must be given him, as there actually is in the shape
of honour and privilege; and wherever these are not adequate there
rulers turn into despots.

But the Just which arises in the relations of Master and Father, is not
identical with, but similar to, these; because there is no possibility
of injustice towards those things which are absolutely one's own; and
a slave or child (so long as this last is of a certain age and not
separated into an independent being), is, as it were, part of a man's
self, and no man chooses to hurt himself, for which reason there cannot
be injustice towards one's own self: therefore neither is there the
social Unjust or Just, which was stated to be in accordance with law and
to exist between those among whom law naturally exists, and these were
said to be they to whom belongs equality of ruling and being ruled.

Hence also there is Just rather between a man and his wife than between
a man and his children or slaves; this is in fact the Just arising in
domestic relations: and this too is different from the Social Just.

[Sidenote: VII] Further, this last-mentioned Just is of two kinds,
natural and conventional; the former being that which has everywhere the
same force and does not depend upon being received or not; the latter
being that which originally may be this way or that indifferently but
not after enactment: for instance, the price of ransom being fixed at
a mina, or the sacrificing a goat instead of two sheep; and again, all
cases of special enactment, as the sacrificing to Brasidas as a hero; in
short, all matters of special decree.

But there are some men who think that all the Justs are of this latter
kind, and on this ground: whatever exists by nature, they say, is
unchangeable and has everywhere the same force; fire, for instance,
burns not here only but in Persia as well, but the Justs they see
changed in various places.

Now this is not really so, and yet it is in a way (though among the gods
perhaps by no means): still even amongst ourselves there is somewhat
existing by nature: allowing that everything is subject to change, still
there is that which does exist by nature, and that which does not.

Nay, we may go further, and say that it is practically plain what among
things which can be otherwise does exist by nature, and what does not
but is dependent upon enactment and conventional, even granting
that both are alike subject to be changed: and the same distinctive
illustration will apply to this and other cases; the right hand is
naturally the stronger, still some men may become equally strong in
both.

[Sidenote: 1135_a_] A parallel may be drawn between the Justs which
depend upon convention and expedience, and measures; for wine and corn
measures are not equal in all places, but where men buy they are large,
and where these same sell again they are smaller: well, in like manner
the Justs which are not natural, but of human invention, are not
everywhere the same, for not even the forms of government are, and yet
there is one only which by nature would be best in all places.

Now of Justs and Lawfuls each bears to the acts which embody and
exemplify it the relation of an universal to a particular; the acts
being many, but each of the principles only singular because each is an
universal. And so there is a difference between an unjust act and the
abstract Unjust, and the just act and the abstract Just: I mean, a thing
is unjust in itself, by nature or by ordinance; well, when this has been
embodied in act, there is an unjust act, but not till then, only
some unjust thing. And similarly of a just act. (Perhaps [Greek:
dikaiopragaema] is more correctly the common or generic term for just
act, the word [Greek: dikaioma], which I have here used, meaning
generally and properly the act corrective of the unjust act.) Now as
to each of them, what kinds there are, and how many, and what is their
object-matter, we must examine afterwards.

[Sidenote: VIII] For the present we proceed to say that, the Justs
and the Unjusts being what have been mentioned, a man is said to act
unjustly or justly when he embodies these abstracts in voluntary
actions, but when in involuntary, then he neither acts unjustly or
justly except accidentally; I mean that the being just or unjust is
really only accidental to the agents in such cases.

So both unjust and just actions are limited by the being voluntary or
the contrary: for when an embodying of the Unjust is voluntary, then
it is blamed and is at the same time also an unjust action: but, if
voluntariness does not attach, there will be a thing which is in itself
unjust but not yet an unjust action.

By voluntary, I mean, as we stated before, whatsoever of things in his
own power a man does with knowledge, and the absence of ignorance as to
the person to whom, or the instrument with which, or the result with
which he does; as, for instance, whom he strikes, what he strikes him
with, and with what probable result; and each of these points again, not
accidentally nor by compulsion; as supposing another man were to seize
his hand and strike a third person with it, here, of course, the owner
of the hand acts not voluntarily, because it did not rest with him to do
or leave undone: or again, it is conceivable that the person struck may
be his father, and he may know that it is a man, or even one of the
present company, whom he is striking, but not know that it is his
father. And let these same distinctions be supposed to be carried into
the case of the result and in fact the whole of any given action. In
fine then, that is involuntary which is done through ignorance, or
which, not resulting from ignorance, is not in the agent's control or is
done on compulsion.

I mention these cases, because there are many natural *[Sidenote:
1135_b_] things which we do and suffer knowingly but still no one of
which is either voluntary or involuntary, growing old, or dying, for
instance.

Again, accidentality may attach to the unjust in like manner as to the
just acts. For instance, a man may have restored what was deposited
with him, but against his will and from fear of the consequences of
a refusal: we must not say that he either does what is just, or does
justly, except accidentally: and in like manner the man who through
compulsion and against his will fails to restore a deposit, must be said
to do unjustly, or to do what is unjust, accidentally only.

Again, voluntary actions we do either from deliberate choice or without
it; from it, when we act from previous deliberation; without it, when
without any previous deliberation. Since then hurts which may be done in
transactions between man and man are threefold, those mistakes which are
attended with ignorance are, when a man either does a thing not to the
man to whom he meant to do it, or not the thing he meant to do, or not
with the instrument, or not with the result which he intended: either he
did not think he should hit him at all, or not with this, or this is not
the man he thought he should hit, or he did not think this would be
the result of the blow but a result has followed which he did not
anticipate; as, for instance, he did it not to wound but merely to prick
him; or it is not the man whom, or the way in which, he meant.

Now when the hurt has come about contrary to all reasonable expectation,
it is a Misadventure; when though not contrary to expectation yet
without any viciousness, it is a Mistake; for a man makes a mistake when
the origination of the cause rests with himself, he has a misadventure
when it is external to himself. When again he acts with knowledge, but
not from previous deliberation, it is an unjust action; for instance,
whatever happens to men from anger or other passions which are necessary
or natural: for when doing these hurts or making these mistakes they act
unjustly of course and their actions are unjust, still they are not yet
confirmed unjust or wicked persons by reason of these, because the hurt
did not arise from depravity in the doer of it: but when it does arise
from deliberate choice, then the doer is a confirmed unjust and depraved
man.

And on this principle acts done from anger are fairly judged not to be
from malice prepense, because it is not the man who acts in wrath who
is the originator really but he who caused his wrath. And again,
the question at issue in such cases is not respecting the fact but
respecting the justice of the case, the occasion of anger being a notion
of injury. I mean, that the parties do not dispute about the fact, as in
questions of contract (where one of the two must be a rogue, unless real
forgetfulness can be pleaded), but, admitting the fact, they dispute on
which side the justice of the case lies (the one who plotted against the
other, _i.e._ the real aggressor, of course, cannot be ignorant), so
that the one thinks there is injustice committed while the other does
not.

[Sidenote: 11364] Well then, a man acts unjustly if he has hurt another
of deliberate purpose, and he who commits such acts of injustice is
_ipso facto_ an unjust character when they are in violation of the
proportionate or the equal; and in like manner also a man is a just
character when he acts justly of deliberate purpose, and he does act
justly if he acts voluntarily.

Then as for involuntary acts of harm, they are either such as are
excusable or such as are not: under the former head come all errors done
not merely in ignorance but from ignorance; under the latter all that
are done not from ignorance but in ignorance caused by some passion
which is neither natural nor fairly attributable to human infirmity.

[Sidenote: IX] Now a question may be raised whether we have spoken with
sufficient distinctness as to being unjustly dealt with, and dealing
unjustly towards others. First, whether the case is possible which
Euripides has put, saying somewhat strangely,

  "My mother he hath slain;  the tale is short,
  Either he willingly did slay her willing,
  Or else with her will but against his own."

I mean then, is it really possible for a person to be unjustly dealt
with with his own consent, or must every case of being unjustly dealt
with be against the will of the sufferer as every act of unjust dealing
is voluntary?

And next, are cases of being unjustly dealt with to be ruled all one way
as every act of unjust dealing is voluntary? or may we say that some
cases are voluntary and some involuntary?

Similarly also as regards being justly dealt with: all just acting is
voluntary, so that it is fair to suppose that the being dealt with
unjustly or justly must be similarly opposed, as to being either
voluntary or involuntary.

Now as for being justly dealt with, the position that every case of this
is voluntary is a strange one, for some are certainly justly dealt
with without their will. The fact is a man may also fairly raise this
question, whether in every case he who has suffered what is unjust is
therefore unjustly dealt with, or rather that the case is the same with
suffering as it is with acting; namely that in both it is possible to
participate in what is just, but only accidentally. Clearly the case of
what is unjust is similar: for doing things in themselves unjust is not
identical with acting unjustly, nor is suffering them the same as being
unjustly dealt with. So too of acting justly and being justly dealt
with, since it is impossible to be unjustly dealt with unless some one
else acts unjustly or to be justly dealt with unless some one else acts
justly.

Now if acting unjustly is simply "hurting another voluntarily" (by which
I mean, knowing whom you are hurting, and wherewith, and how you are
hurting him), and the man who fails of self-control voluntarily hurts
himself, then this will be a case of being voluntarily dealt unjustly
with, and it will be possible for a man to deal unjustly with himself.
(This by the way is one of the questions raised, whether it is possible
for a man to deal unjustly with himself.) Or again, a man may, by
reason of failing of self-control, receive hurt from another man acting
voluntarily, and so here will be another case of being unjustly dealt
with voluntarily. [Sidenote: 1136]

The solution, I take it, is this: the definition of being unjustly dealt
with is not correct, but we must add, to the hurting with the knowledge
of the person hurt and the instrument and the manner of hurting him, the
fact of its being against the wish of the man who is hurt.

So then a man may be hurt and suffer what is in itself unjust
voluntarily, but unjustly dealt with voluntarily no man can be: since no
man wishes to be hurt, not even he who fails of self-control, who really
acts contrary to his wish: for no man wishes for that which he does not
_think_ to be good, and the man who fails of self-control does not what
he thinks he ought to do.

And again, he that gives away his own property (as Homer says Glaucus
gave to Diomed, "armour of gold for brass, armour worth a hundred oxen
for that which was worth but nine") is not unjustly dealt with, because
the giving rests entirely with himself; but being unjustly dealt with
does not, there must be some other person who is dealing unjustly
towards him.

With respect to being unjustly dealt with then, it is clear that it is
not voluntary.

There remain yet two points on which we purposed to speak: first, is he
chargeable with an unjust act who in distribution has _given_ the larger
share to one party contrary to the proper rate, or he that _has_ the
larger share? next, can a man deal unjustly by himself?

In the first question, if the first-named alternative is possible and
it is the distributor who acts unjustly and not he who has the larger
share, then supposing that a person knowingly and willingly gives more
to another than to himself here is a case of a man dealing unjustly by
himself; which, in fact, moderate men are thought to do, for it is a
characteristic of the equitable man to take less than his due.

Is not this the answer? that the case is not quite fairly stated,
because of some other good, such as credit or the abstract honourable,
in the supposed case the man did get the larger share. And again, the
difficulty is solved by reference to the definition of unjust dealing:
for the man suffers nothing contrary to his own wish, so that, on this
score at least, he is not unjustly dealt with, but, if anything, he is
hurt only.

It is evident also that it is the distributor who acts unjustly and not
the man who has the greater share: because the mere fact of the abstract
Unjust attaching to what a man does, does not constitute unjust action,
but the doing this voluntarily: and voluntariness attaches to that
quarter whence is the origination of the action, which clearly is in the
distributor not in the receiver. And again the term doing is used in
several senses; in one sense inanimate objects kill, or the hand, or
the slave by his master's bidding; so the man in question does not act
unjustly but does things which are in themselves unjust.

[Sidenote: 1137a] Again, suppose that a man has made a wrongful award
in ignorance; in the eye of the law he does not act unjustly nor is
his awarding unjust, but yet he is in a certain sense: for the Just
according to law and primary or natural Just are not coincident: but, if
he knowingly decided unjustly, then he himself as well as the receiver
got the larger share, that is, either of favour from the receiver or
private revenge against the other party: and so the man who decided
unjustly from these motives gets a larger share, in exactly the same
sense as a man would who received part of the actual matter of the
unjust action: because in this case the man who wrongly adjudged, say a
field, did not actually get land but money by his unjust decision.

Now men suppose that acting Unjustly rests entirely with themselves,
and conclude that acting Justly is therefore also easy. But this is not
really so; to have connection with a neighbour's wife, or strike one's
neighbour, or give the money with one's hand, is of course easy and
rests with one's self: but the doing these acts with certain inward
dispositions neither is easy nor rests entirely with one's self. And in
like way, the knowing what is Just and what Unjust men think no great
instance of wisdom because it is not hard to comprehend those things
of which the laws speak. They forget that these are not Just actions,
except accidentally: to be Just they must be done and distributed in
a certain manner: and this is a more difficult task than knowing what
things are wholesome; for in this branch of knowledge it is an easy
matter to know honey, wine, hellebore, cautery, or the use of the knife,
but the knowing how one should administer these with a view to health,
and to whom and at what time, amounts in fact to being a physician.

From this very same mistake they suppose also, that acting Unjustly is
equally in the power of the Just man, for the Just man no less, nay even
more, than the Unjust, may be able to do the particular acts; he may be
able to have intercourse with a woman or strike a man; or the brave man
to throw away his shield and turn his back and run this way or that.
True: but then it is not the mere doing these things which constitutes
acts of cowardice or injustice (except accidentally), but the doing them
with certain inward dispositions: just as it is not the mere using or
not using the knife, administering or not administering certain drugs,
which constitutes medical treatment or curing, but doing these things in
a certain particular way.

Again the abstract principles of Justice have their province among those
who partake of what is abstractedly good, and can have too much or too
little of these. Now there are beings who cannot have too much of them,
as perhaps the gods; there are others, again, to whom no particle of
them is of use, those who are incurably wicked to whom all things are
hurtful; others to whom they are useful to a certain degree: for this
reason then the province of Justice is among Men.

[Sidenote: 1137b] We have next to speak of Equity and the Equitable,
that is to say, of the relations of Equity to Justice and the Equitable
to the Just; for when we look into the matter the two do not appear
identical nor yet different in kind; and we sometimes commend the
Equitable and the man who embodies it in his actions, so that by way of
praise we commonly transfer the term also to other acts instead of the
term good, thus showing that the more Equitable a thing is the better it
is: at other times following a certain train of reasoning we arrive at a
difficulty, in that the Equitable though distinct from the Just is yet
praiseworthy; it seems to follow either that the Just is not good or the
Equitable not Just, since they are by hypothesis different; or if both
are good then they are identical.

This is a tolerably fair statement of the difficulty which on these
grounds arises in respect of the Equitable; but, in fact, all these may
be reconciled and really involve no contradiction: for the Equitable is
Just, being also better than one form of Just, but is not better than
the Just as though it were different from it in kind: Just and Equitable
then are identical, and, both being good, the Equitable is the better of
the two.

What causes the difficulty is this; the Equitable is Just, but not the
Just which is in accordance with written law, being in fact a correction
of that kind of Just. And the account of this is, that every law is
necessarily universal while there are some things which it is not
possible to speak of rightly in any universal or general statement.
Where then there is a necessity for general statement, while a general
statement cannot apply rightly to all cases, the law takes the
generality of cases, being fully aware of the error thus involved; and
rightly too notwithstanding, because the fault is not in the law, or
in the framer of the law, but is inherent in the nature of the thing,
because the matter of all action is necessarily such.

When then the law has spoken in general terms, and there arises a
case of exception to the general rule, it is proper, in so far as the
lawgiver omits the case and by reason of his universality of statement
is wrong, to set right the omission by ruling it as the lawgiver himself
would rule were he there present, and would have provided by law had he
foreseen the case would arise. And so the Equitable is Just but better
than one form of Just; I do not mean the abstract Just but the error
which arises out of the universality of statement: and this is the
nature of the Equitable, "a correction of Law, where Law is defective by
reason of its universality."

This is the reason why not all things are according to law, because
there are things about which it is simply impossible to lay down a law,
and so we want special enactments for particular cases. For to speak
generally, the rule of the undefined must be itself undefined also, just
as the rule to measure Lesbian building is made of lead: for this rule
shifts according to the form of each stone and the special enactment
according to the facts of the case in question.

[Sidenote: 1138a] It is clear then what the Equitable is; namely that it
is Just but better than one form of Just: and hence it appears too who
the Equitable man is: he is one who has a tendency to choose and carry
out these principles, and who is not apt to press the letter of the law
on the worse side but content to waive his strict claims though backed
by the law: and this moral state is Equity, being a species of Justice,
not a different moral state from Justice.

XI

The answer to the second of the two questions indicated above, "whether
it is possible for a man to deal unjustly by himself," is obvious from
what has been already stated. In the first place, one class of Justs is
those which are enforced by law in accordance with Virtue in the most
extensive sense of the term: for instance, the law does not bid a man
kill himself; and whatever it does not bid it forbids: well, whenever a
man does hurt contrary to the law (unless by way of requital of hurt),
voluntarily, i.e. knowing to whom he does it and wherewith, he acts
Unjustly. Now he that from rage kills himself, voluntarily, does this
in contravention of Right Reason, which the law does not permit. He
therefore acts Unjustly: but towards whom? towards the Community, not
towards himself (because he suffers with his own consent, and no man can
be Unjustly dealt with with his own consent), and on this principle the
Community punishes him; that is a certain infamy is attached to the
suicide as to one who acts Unjustly towards the Community.

Next, a man cannot deal Unjustly by himself in the sense in which a man
is Unjust who only does Unjust acts without being entirely bad (for the
two things are different, because the Unjust man is in a way bad, as the
coward is, not as though he were chargeable with badness in the full
extent of the term, and so he does not act Unjustly in this sense),
because if it were so then it would be possible for the same thing to
have been taken away from and added to the same person: but this is
really not possible, the Just and the Unjust always implying a plurality
of persons.

Again, an Unjust action must be voluntary, done of deliberate purpose,
and aggressive (for the man who hurts because he has first suffered and
is merely requiting the same is not thought to act Unjustly), but here
the man does to himself and suffers the same things at the same time.

Again, it would imply the possibility of being Unjustly dealt with with
one's own consent.

And, besides all this, a man cannot act Unjustly without his act falling
under some particular crime; now a man cannot seduce his own wife,
commit a burglary on his own premises, or steal his own property. After
all, the general answer to the question is to allege what was settled
respecting being Unjustly dealt with with one's own consent.

It is obvious, moreover, that being Unjustly dealt by and dealing
Unjustly by others are both wrong; because the one is having less, the
other having more, than the mean, and the case is parallel to that of
the healthy in the healing art, and that of good condition in the art of
training: but still the dealing Unjustly by others is the worst of the
two, because this involves wickedness and is blameworthy; wickedness, I
mean, either wholly, or nearly so (for not all voluntary wrong implies
injustice), but the being Unjustly dealt by does not involve wickedness
or injustice.

[Sidenote: 1138b] In itself then, the being Unjustly dealt by is the
least bad, but accidentally it may be the greater evil of the two.
However, scientific statement cannot take in such considerations; a
pleurisy, for instance, is called a greater physical evil than a bruise:
and yet this last may be the greater accidentally; it may chance that a
bruise received in a fall may cause one to be captured by the enemy and
slain.

Further: Just, in the way of metaphor and similitude, there may be I do
not say between a man and himself exactly but between certain parts of
his nature; but not Just of every kind, only such as belongs to the
relation of master and slave, or to that of the head of a family. For
all through this treatise the rational part of the Soul has been viewed
as distinct from the irrational.

Now, taking these into consideration, there is thought to be a
possibility of injustice towards one's self, because herein it is
possible for men to suffer somewhat in contradiction of impulses really
their own; and so it is thought that there is Just of a certain kind
between these parts mutually, as between ruler and ruled.

Let this then be accepted as an account of the distinctions which we
recognise respecting Justice and the rest of the moral virtues.




BOOK VI


I having stated in a former part of this treatise that men should choose
the mean instead of either the excess or defect, and that the mean
is according to the dictates of Right Reason; we will now proceed to
explain this term.

For in all the habits which we have expressly mentioned, as likewise
in all the others, there is, so to speak, a mark with his eye fixed on
which the man who has Reason tightens or slacks his rope; and there is a
certain limit of those mean states which we say are in accordance with
Right Reason, and lie between excess on the one hand and defect on the
other.

Now to speak thus is true enough but conveys no very definite meaning:
as, in fact, in all other pursuits requiring attention and diligence on
which skill and science are brought to bear; it is quite true of course
to say that men are neither to labour nor relax too much or too little,
but in moderation, and as Right Reason directs; yet if this were all
a man had he would not be greatly the wiser; as, for instance, if in
answer to the question, what are proper applications to the body, he
were to be told, "Oh! of course, whatever the science of medicine, and
in such manner as the physician, directs."

And so in respect of the mental states it is requisite not merely that
this should be true which has been already stated, but further that it
should be expressly laid down what Right Reason is, and what is the
definition of it.

[Sidenote: 1139a] Now in our division of the Excellences of the Soul, we
said there were two classes, the Moral and the Intellectual: the former
we have already gone through; and we will now proceed to speak of the
others, premising a few words respecting the Soul itself. It was
stated before, you will remember, that the Soul consists of two parts,
the Rational, and Irrational: we must now make a similar division of the
Rational.

Let it be understood then that there are two parts of the Soul possessed
of Reason; one whereby we realise those existences whose causes cannot
be otherwise than they are, and one whereby we realise those which can
be otherwise than they are (for there must be, answering to things
generically different, generically different parts of the soul naturally
adapted to each, since these parts of the soul possess their knowledge
in virtue of a certain resemblance and appropriateness in themselves to
the objects of which they are percipients); and let us name the
former, "that which is apt to know," the latter, "that which is apt to
calculate" (because deliberating and calculating are the same, and no
one ever deliberates about things which cannot be otherwise than they
are: and so the Calculative will be one part of the Rational faculty of
the soul).

We must discover, then, which is the best state of each of these,
because that will be the Excellence of each; and this again is relative
to the work each has to do.

II

There are in the Soul three functions on which depend moral action and
truth; Sense, Intellect, Appetition, whether vague Desire or definite
Will. Now of these Sense is the originating cause of no moral action, as
is seen from the fact that brutes have Sense but are in no way partakers
of moral action.

[Intellect and Will are thus connected,] what in the Intellectual
operation is Affirmation and Negation that in the Will is Pursuit and
Avoidance, And so, since Moral Virtue is a State apt to exercise Moral
Choice and Moral Choice is Will consequent on deliberation, the Reason
must be true and the Will right, to constitute good Moral Choice, and
what the Reason affirms the Will must pursue. Now this Intellectual
operation and this Truth is what bears upon Moral Action; of course
truth and falsehood than the conclusion such knowledge as he has will be
merely accidental.

IV

[Sidenote:1140a] Let thus much be accepted as a definition of Knowledge.
Matter which may exist otherwise than it actually does in any given case
(commonly called Contingent) is of two kinds, that which is the object
of Making, and that which is the object of Doing; now Making and Doing
are two different things (as we show in the exoteric treatise), and
so that state of mind, conjoined with Reason, which is apt to Do, is
distinct from that also conjoined with Reason, which is apt to Make: and
for this reason they are not included one by the other, that is, Doing
is not Making, nor Making Doing. Now as Architecture is an Art, and is
the same as "a certain state of mind, conjoined with Reason, which is
apt to Make," and as there is no Art which is not such a state, nor any
such state which is not an Art, Art, in its strict and proper sense,
must be "a state of mind, conjoined with true Reason, apt to Make."

Now all Art has to do with production, and contrivance, and seeing how
any of those things may be produced which may either be or not be, and
the origination of which rests with the maker and not with the thing
made.

And, so neither things which exist or come into being necessarily, nor
things in the way of nature, come under the province of Art, because
these are self-originating. And since Making and Doing are distinct, Art
must be concerned with the former and not the latter. And in a certain
sense Art and Fortune are concerned with the same things, as, Agathon
says by the way,

  "Art Fortune loves, and is of her beloved."

So Art, as has been stated, is "a certain state of mind, apt to Make,
conjoined with true Reason;" its absence, on the contrary, is the same
state conjoined with false Reason, and both are employed upon Contingent
matter.

V

As for Practical Wisdom, we shall ascertain its nature by examining to
what kind of persons we in common language ascribe it.

[Sidenote: 1140b] It is thought then to be the property of the
Practically Wise man to be able to deliberate well respecting what is
good and expedient for himself, not in any definite line, as what is
conducive to health or strength, but what to living well. A proof of
this is that we call men Wise in this or that, when they calculate well
with a view to some good end in a case where there is no definite
rule. And so, in a general way of speaking, the man who is good at
deliberation will be Practically Wise. Now no man deliberates respecting
things which cannot be otherwise than they are, nor such as lie not
within the range of his own action: and so, since Knowledge requires
strict demonstrative reasoning, of which Contingent matter does not
admit (I say Contingent matter, because all matters of deliberation must
be Contingent and deliberation cannot take place with respect to things
which are Necessarily), Practical Wisdom cannot be Knowledge nor Art;
nor the former, because what falls under the province of Doing must be
Contingent; not the latter, because Doing and Making are different in
kind.

It remains then that it must be "a state of mind true, conjoined with
Reason, and apt to Do, having for its object those things which are good
or bad for Man:" because of Making something beyond itself is always the
object, but cannot be of Doing because the very well-doing is in itself
an End.

For this reason we think Pericles and men of that stamp to be
Practically Wise, because they can see what is good for themselves and
for men in general, and we also think those to be such who are skilled
in domestic management or civil government. In fact, this is the reason
why we call the habit of perfected self-mastery by the name which in
Greek it bears, etymologically signifying "that which preserves the
Practical Wisdom:" for what it does preserve is the Notion I have
mentioned, _i.e._ of one's own true interest, For it is not every kind
of Notion which the pleasant and the painful corrupt and pervert, as,
for instance, that "the three angles of every rectilineal triangle are
equal to two right angles," but only those bearing on moral action.

For the Principles of the matters of moral action are the final cause
of them: now to the man who has been corrupted by reason of pleasure or
pain the Principle immediately becomes obscured, nor does he see that it
is his duty to choose and act in each instance with a view to this final
cause and by reason of it: for viciousness has a tendency to destroy the
moral Principle: and so Practical Wisdom must be "a state conjoined with
reason, true, having human good for its object, and apt to do."

Then again Art admits of degrees of excellence, but Practical Wisdom
does not: and in Art he who goes wrong purposely is preferable to him
who does so unwittingly, but not so in respect of Practical Wisdom or
the other Virtues. It plainly is then an Excellence of a certain kind,
and not an Art.

Now as there are two parts of the Soul which have Reason, it must be the
Excellence of the Opinionative [which we called before calculative or
deliberative], because both Opinion and Practical Wisdom are exercised
upon Contingent matter. And further, it is not simply a state conjoined
with Reason, as is proved by the fact that such a state may be forgotten
and so lost while Practical Wisdom cannot.

VI

Now Knowledge is a conception concerning universals and Necessary
matter, and there are of course certain First Principles in all trains
of demonstrative reasoning (that is of all Knowledge because this is
connected with reasoning): that faculty, then, which takes in the first
principles of that which comes under the range of Knowledge, cannot be
either Knowledge, or Art, or Practical Wisdom: not Knowledge, because
what is the object of Knowledge must be derived from demonstrative
reasoning; not either of the other two, because they are exercised upon
Contingent matter only. [Sidenote: 1141a] Nor can it be Science which
takes in these, because the Scientific Man must in some cases depend on
demonstrative Reasoning.

It comes then to this: since the faculties whereby we always attain
truth and are never deceived when dealing with matter Necessary or even
Contingent are Knowledge, Practical Wisdom, Science, and Intuition, and
the faculty which takes in First Principles cannot be any of the three
first; the last, namely Intuition, must be it which performs this
function.

VII

Science is a term we use principally in two meanings: in the first
place, in the Arts we ascribe it to those who carry their arts to the
highest accuracy; Phidias, for instance, we call a Scientific or cunning
sculptor; Polycleitus a Scientific or cunning statuary; meaning, in this
instance, nothing else by Science than an excellence of art: in the
other sense, we think some to be Scientific in a general way, not in any
particular line or in any particular thing, just as Homer says of a man
in his Margites; "Him the Gods made neither a digger of the ground, nor
ploughman, nor in any other way Scientific."

So it is plain that Science must mean the most accurate of all
Knowledge; but if so, then the Scientific man must not merely know the
deductions from the First Principles but be in possession of truth
respecting the First Principles. So that Science must be equivalent
to Intuition and Knowledge; it is, so to speak, Knowledge of the most
precious objects, _with a head on_.

I say of the most precious things, because it is absurd to suppose
[Greek: politikae], or Practical Wisdom, to be the highest, unless it
can be shown that Man is the most excellent of all that exists in the
Universe. Now if "healthy" and "good" are relative terms, differing
when applied to men or to fish, but "white" and "straight" are the same
always, men must allow that the Scientific is the same always, but the
Practically Wise varies: for whatever provides all things well for
itself, to this they would apply the term Practically Wise, and commit
these matters to it; which is the reason, by the way, that they call
some brutes Practically Wise, such that is as plainly have a faculty of
forethought respecting their own subsistence.

And it is quite plain that Science and [Greek: politikae] cannot be
identical: because if men give the name of Science to that faculty which
is employed upon what is expedient for themselves, there will be many
instead of one, because there is not one and the same faculty employed
on the good of all animals collectively, unless in the same sense as you
may say there is one art of healing with respect to all living beings.

[Sidenote: 1141b] If it is urged that man is superior to all other
animals, that makes no difference: for there are many other things more
Godlike in their nature than Man, as, most obviously, the elements of
which the Universe is composed.

It is plain then that Science is the union of Knowledge and Intuition,
and has for its objects those things which are most precious in their
nature. Accordingly, Anexagoras, Thales, and men of that stamp, people
call Scientific, but not Practically Wise because they see them ignorant
of what concerns themselves; and they say that what they know is quite
out of the common run certainly, and wonderful, and hard, and very fine
no doubt, but still useless because they do not seek after what is good
for them as men.

But Practical Wisdom is employed upon human matters, and such as are
objects of deliberation (for we say, that to deliberate well is most
peculiarly the work of the man who possesses this Wisdom), and no man
deliberates about things which cannot be otherwise than they are, nor
about any save those that have some definite End and this End good
resulting from Moral Action; and the man to whom we should give the name
of Good in Counsel, simply and without modification, is he who in the
way of calculation has a capacity for attaining that of practical goods
which is the best for Man. Nor again does Practical Wisdom consist in
a knowledge of general principles only, but it is necessary that one
should know also the particular details, because it is apt to act, and
action is concerned with details: for which reason sometimes men who
have not much knowledge are more practical than others who have; among
others, they who derive all they know from actual experience: suppose a
man to know, for instance, that light meats are easy of digestion and
wholesome, but not what kinds of meat are light, he will not produce a
healthy state; that man will have a much better chance of doing so,
who knows that the flesh of birds is light and wholesome. Since then
Practical Wisdom is apt to act, one ought to have both kinds of
knowledge, or, if only one, the knowledge of details rather than
of Principles. So there will be in respect of Practical Wisdom the
distinction of supreme and subordinate.

VIII

Further: [Greek: politikhae] and Practical Wisdom are the same mental
state, but the point of view is not the same.

Of Practical Wisdom exerted upon a community that which I would call
the Supreme is the faculty of Legislation; the subordinate, which is
concerned with the details, generally has the common name [Greek:
politikhae], and its functions are Action and Deliberation (for the
particular enactment is a matter of action, being the ultimate issue of
this branch of Practical Wisdom, and therefore people commonly say, that
these men alone are really engaged in government, because they alone
act, filling the same place relatively to legislators, that workmen do
to a master).

Again, that is thought to be Practical Wisdom in the most proper sense
which has for its object the interest of the Individual: and this
usually appropriates the common name: the others are called respectively
Domestic Management, Legislation, Executive Government divided into two
branches, Deliberative and Judicial. Now of course, knowledge for
one's self is one kind of knowledge, but it admits of many shades of
difference: and it is a common notion that the man [Sidenote:1142a] who
knows and busies himself about his own concerns merely is the man of
Practical Wisdom, while they who extend their solicitude to society at
large are considered meddlesome.

Euripides has thus embodied this sentiment; "How," says one of his
Characters, "How foolish am I, who whereas I might have shared equally,
idly numbered among the multitude of the army ... for them that are busy
and meddlesome [Jove hates]," because the generality of mankind seek
their own good and hold that this is their proper business. It is then
from this opinion that the notion has arisen that such men are the
Practically-Wise. And yet it is just possible that the good of the
individual cannot be secured independently of connection with a family
or a community. And again, how a man should manage his own affairs is
sometimes not quite plain, and must be made a matter of inquiry.

A corroboration of what I have said is the fact, that the young come to
be geometricians, and mathematicians, and Scientific in such matters,
but it is not thought that a young man can come to be possessed of
Practical Wisdom: now the reason is, that this Wisdom has for its object
particular facts, which come to be known from experience, which a young
man has not because it is produced only by length of time.

By the way, a person might also inquire why a boy may be made a
mathematician but not Scientific or a natural philosopher. Is not this
the reason? that mathematics are taken in by the process of abstraction,
but the principles of Science and natural philosophy must be gained by
experiment; and the latter young men talk of but do not realise, while
the nature of the former is plain and clear.

Again, in matter of practice, error attaches either to the general rule,
in the process of deliberation, or to the particular fact: for instance,
this would be a general rule, "All water of a certain gravity is bad;"
the particular fact, "this water is of that gravity."

And that Practical Wisdom is not knowledge is plain, for it has to do
with the ultimate issue, as has been said, because every object of
action is of this nature.

To Intuition it is opposed, for this takes in those principles which
cannot be proved by reasoning, while Practical Wisdom is concerned with
the ultimate particular fact which cannot be realised by Knowledge but
by Sense; I do not mean one of the five senses, but the same by which
we take in the mathematical fact, that no rectilineal figure can be
contained by less than three lines, i.e. that a triangle is the ultimate
figure, because here also is a stopping point.

This however is Sense rather than Practical Wisdom, which is of another
kind.

IX

Now the acts of inquiring and deliberating differ, though deliberating
is a kind of inquiring. We ought to ascertain about Good Counsel
likewise what it is, whether a kind of Knowledge, or Opinion, or Happy
Conjecture, or some other kind of faculty. Knowledge it obviously is
not, because men do not inquire about what they know, and Good Counsel
is a kind of deliberation, and the man who is deliberating is inquiring
and calculating. [Sidenote:1142b]

Neither is it Happy Conjecture; because this is independent of
reasoning, and a rapid operation; but men deliberate a long time, and
it is a common saying that one should execute speedily what has been
resolved upon in deliberation, but deliberate slowly.

Quick perception of causes again is a different faculty from good
counsel, for it is a species of Happy Conjecture. Nor is Good Counsel
Opinion of any kind.

Well then, since he who deliberates ill goes wrong, and he who
deliberates well does so rightly, it is clear that Good Counsel is
rightness of some kind, but not of Knowledge nor of Opinion: for
Knowledge cannot be called right because it cannot be wrong, and
Rightness of Opinion is Truth: and again, all which is the object of
opinion is definitely marked out.

Still, however, Good Counsel is not independent of Reason, Does it
remain then that it is a rightness of Intellectual Operation simply,
because this does not amount to an assertion; and the objection to
Opinion was that it is not a process of inquiry but already a definite
assertion; whereas whosoever deliberates, whether well or ill, is
engaged in inquiry and calculation.

Well, Good Counsel is a Rightness of deliberation, and so the first
question must regard the nature and objects of deliberation. Now
remember Rightness is an equivocal term; we plainly do not mean
Rightness of any kind whatever; the [Greek: akrataes], for instance, or
the bad man, will obtain by his calculation what he sets before him as
an object, and so he may be said to have deliberated _rightly_ in one
sense, but will have attained a great evil. Whereas to have deliberated
well is thought to be a good, because Good Counsel is Rightness of
deliberation of such a nature as is apt to attain good.

But even this again you may get by false reasoning, and hit upon the
right effect though not through right means, your middle term being
fallacious: and so neither will this be yet Good Counsel in consequence
of which you get what you ought but not through proper means.

Again, one man may hit on a thing after long deliberation, another
quickly. And so that before described will not be yet Good Counsel, but
the Rightness must be with reference to what is expedient; and you must
have a proper end in view, pursue it in a right manner and right time.

Once more. One may deliberate well either generally or towards some
particular End. Good counsel in the general then is that which goes
right towards that which is the End in a general way of consideration;
in particular, that which does so towards some particular End.

Since then deliberating well is a quality of men possessed of Practical
Wisdom, Good Counsel must be "Rightness in respect of what conduces to a
given End, of which Practical Wisdom is the true conception." [Sidenote:
X 1143_a_] There is too the faculty of Judiciousness, and also its
absence, in virtue of which we call men Judicious or the contrary.

Now Judiciousness is neither entirely identical with Knowledge or
Opinion (for then all would have been Judicious), nor is it any one
specific science, as medical science whose object matter is things
wholesome; or geometry whose object matter is magnitude: for it has not
for its object things which always exist and are immutable, nor of those
things which come into being just any which may chance; but those in
respect of which a man might doubt and deliberate.

And so it has the same object matter as Practical Wisdom; yet the two
faculties are not identical, because Practical Wisdom has the capacity
for commanding and taking the initiative, for its End is "what one
should do or not do:" but Judiciousness is only apt to decide upon
suggestions (though we do in Greek put "well" on to the faculty and its
concrete noun, these really mean exactly the same as the plain words),
and Judiciousness is neither the having Practical Wisdom, nor attaining
it: but just as learning is termed [Greek: sunievai] when a man uses
his knowledge, so judiciousness consists in employing the Opinionative
faculty in judging concerning those things which come within the
province of Practical Wisdom, when another enunciates them; and not
judging merely, but judging well (for [Greek: eu] and [Greek: kalos]
mean exactly the same thing). And the Greek name of this faculty is
derived from the use of the term [Greek: suvievai] in learning: [Greek:
mavthaveiv] and [Greek: suvievai] being often used as synonymous.

[Sidenote: XI] The faculty called [Greek: gvomh], in right of which we
call men [Greek: euyvomoves], or say they have [Greek: gvomh], is "the
right judgment of the equitable man." A proof of which is that we most
commonly say that the equitable man has a tendency to make allowance,
and the making allowance in certain cases is equitable. And [Greek:
sungvomae] (the word denoting allowance) is right [Greek: gvomh] having
a capacity of making equitable decisions, By "right" I mean that which
attains the True. Now all these mental states tend to the same object,
as indeed common language leads us to expect: I mean, we speak of
[Greek: gnomae], Judiciousness, Practical Wisdom, and Practical
Intuition, attributing the possession of [Greek: gnomae] and Practical
Intuition to the same Individuals whom we denominate Practically-Wise
and Judicious: because all these faculties are employed upon the
extremes, i.e. on particular details; and in right of his aptitude
for deciding on the matters which come within the province of the
Practically-Wise, a man is Judicious and possessed of good [Greek:
gnomae]; i.e. he is disposed to make allowance, for considerations of
equity are entertained by all good men alike in transactions with their
fellows.

And all matters of Moral Action belong to the class of particulars,
otherwise called extremes: for the man of Practical Wisdom must know
them, and Judiciousness and [Greek: gnomae] are concerned with matters
of Moral Actions, which are extremes.

[Sidenote:1143b] Intuition, moreover, takes in the extremes at both
ends: I mean, the first and last terms must be taken in not by reasoning
but by Intuition [so that Intuition comes to be of two kinds], and that
which belongs to strict demonstrative reasonings takes in immutable,
i.e. Necessary, first terms; while that which is employed in practical
matters takes in the extreme, the Contingent, and the minor Premiss: for
the minor Premisses are the source of the Final Cause, Universals being
made up out of Particulars. To take in these, of course, we must have
Sense, i.e. in other words Practical Intuition. And for this reason
these are thought to be simply gifts of nature; and whereas no man is
thought to be Scientific by nature, men are thought to have [Greek:
gnomae], and Judiciousness, and Practical Intuition: a proof of which is
that we think these faculties are a consequence even of particular ages,
and this given age has Practical Intuition and [Greek: gnomae], we say,
as if under the notion that nature is the cause. And thus Intuition is
both the beginning and end, because the proofs are based upon the one
kind of extremes and concern the other.

And so one should attend to the undemonstrable dicta and opinions of the
skilful, the old and the Practically-Wise, no less than to those which
are based on strict reasoning, because they see aright, having gained
their power of moral vision from experience.

XII

Well, we have now stated the nature and objects of Practical Wisdom and
Science respectively, and that they belong each to a different part
of the Soul. But I can conceive a person questioning their utility.
"Science," he would say, "concerns itself with none of the causes of
human happiness (for it has nothing to do with producing anything):
Practical Wisdom has this recommendation, I grant, but where is the need
of it, since its province is those things which are just and honourable,
and good for man, and these are the things which the good man as such
does; but we are not a bit the more apt to do them because we know them,
since the Moral Virtues are Habits; just as we are not more apt to be
healthy or in good condition from mere knowledge of what relates to
these (I mean, of course, things so called not from their producing
health, etc., but from their evidencing it in a particular subject),
for we are not more apt to be healthy and in good condition merely from
knowing the art of medicine or training.

"If it be urged that _knowing what is_ good does not by itself make a
Practically-Wise man but _becoming_ good; still this Wisdom will be no
use either to those that are good, and so have it already, or to those
who have it not; because it will make no difference to them whether they
have it themselves or put themselves under the guidance of others who
have; and we might be contented to be in respect of this as in respect
of health: for though we wish to be healthy still we do not set about
learning the art of healing.

"Furthermore, it would seem to be strange that, though lower in the
scale than Science, it is to be its master; which it is, because
whatever produces results takes the rule and directs in each matter."

This then is what we are to talk about, for these are the only points
now raised.

[Sidenote:1144a] Now first we say that being respectively Excellences
of different parts of the Soul they must be choiceworthy, even on the
supposition that they neither of them produce results.

In the next place we say that they _do_ produce results; that Science
makes Happiness, not as the medical art but as healthiness makes health:
because, being a part of Virtue in its most extensive sense, it makes a
man happy by being possessed and by working.

Next, Man's work _as Man_ is accomplished by virtue of Practical Wisdom
and Moral Virtue, the latter giving the right aim and direction, the
former the right means to its attainment; but of the fourth part of the
Soul, the mere nutritive principle, there is no such Excellence, because
nothing is in its power to do or leave undone.

As to our not being more apt to do what is noble and just by reason of
possessing Practical Wisdom, we must begin a little higher up, taking
this for our starting-point. As we say that men may do things in
themselves just and yet not be just men; for instance, when men do what
the laws require of them, either against their will, or by reason of
ignorance or something else, at all events not for the sake of the
things themselves; and yet they do what they ought and all that the good
man should do; so it seems that to be a good man one must do each act in
a particular frame of mind, I mean from Moral Choice and for the sake of
the things themselves which are done. Now it is Virtue which makes the
Moral Choice right, but whatever is naturally required to carry out
that Choice comes under the province not of Virtue but of a different
faculty. We must halt, as it were, awhile, and speak more clearly on
these points.

There is then a certain faculty, commonly named Cleverness, of such a
nature as to be able to do and attain whatever conduces to _any_ given
purpose: now if that purpose be a good one the faculty is praiseworthy;
if otherwise, it goes by a name which, denoting strictly the ability,
implies the willingness to do _anything_; we accordingly call the
Practically-Wise Clever, and also those who can and will do anything.

Now Practical Wisdom is not identical with Cleverness, nor is it without
this power of adapting means to ends: but this Eye of the Soul (as we
may call it) does not attain its proper state without goodness, as we
have said before and as is quite plain, because the syllogisms into
which Moral Action may be analysed have for their Major Premiss, "since
----------is the End and the Chief Good" (fill up the blank with just
anything you please, for we merely want to exhibit the Form, so that
anything will do), but _how_ this blank should be filled is seen only by
the good man: because Vice distorts the moral vision and causes men to
be deceived in respect of practical principles.

It is clear, therefore, that a man cannot be a Practically-Wise,
without being a good, man.

XIII

[Sidenote:1144b] We must inquire again also about Virtue: for it may be
divided into Natural Virtue and Matured, which two bear to each other a
relation similar to that which Practical Wisdom bears to Cleverness, one
not of identity but resemblance. I speak of Natural Virtue, because men
hold that each of the moral dispositions attach to us all somehow by
nature: we have dispositions towards justice, self-mastery and courage,
for instance, immediately from our birth: but still we seek Goodness
in its highest sense as something distinct from these, and that these
dispositions should attach to us in a somewhat different fashion.
Children and brutes have these natural states, but then they are plainly
hurtful unless combined with an intellectual element: at least thus much
is matter of actual experience and observation, that as a strong body
destitute of sight must, if set in motion, fall violently because it has
not sight, so it is also in the case we are considering: but if it can
get the intellectual element it then excels in acting. Just so the
Natural State of Virtue, being like this strong body, will then
be Virtue in the highest sense when it too is combined with the
intellectual element.

So that, as in the case of the Opinionative faculty, there are two
forms, Cleverness and Practical Wisdom; so also in the case of the Moral
there are two, Natural Virtue and Matured; and of these the latter
cannot be formed without Practical Wisdom.

This leads some to say that all the Virtues are merely intellectual
Practical Wisdom, and Socrates was partly right in his inquiry and
partly wrong: wrong in that he thought all the Virtues were merely
intellectual Practical Wisdom, right in saying they were not independent
of that faculty.

A proof of which is that now all, in defining Virtue, add on the "state"
[mentioning also to what standard it has reference, namely that] "which
is accordant with Right Reason:" now "right" means in accordance with
Practical Wisdom. So then all seem to have an instinctive notion that
that state which is in accordance with Practical Wisdom is Virtue;
however, we must make a slight change in their statement, because that
state is Virtue, not merely which is in accordance with but which
implies the possession of Right Reason; which, upon such matters, is
Practical Wisdom. The difference between us and Socrates is this: he
thought the Virtues were reasoning processes (_i.e._ that they were all
instances of Knowledge in its strict sense), but we say they imply the
possession of Reason.

From what has been said then it is clear that one cannot be, strictly
speaking, good without Practical Wisdom nor Practically-Wise without
moral goodness.

And by the distinction between Natural and Matured Virtue one can
meet the reasoning by which it might be argued "that the Virtues are
separable because the same man is not by nature most inclined to all at
once so that he will have acquired this one before he has that other:"
we would reply that this is possible with respect to the Natural Virtues
but not with respect to those in right of which a man is denominated
simply good: because they will all belong to him together with the one
faculty of Practical Wisdom. [Sidenote:1145a]

It is plain too that even had it not been apt to act we should have
needed it, because it is the Excellence of a part of the Soul; and that
the moral choice cannot be right independently of Practical Wisdom and
Moral Goodness; because this gives the right End, that causes the doing
these things which conduce to the End.

Then again, it is not Master of Science (i.e. of the superior part of
the Soul), just as neither is the healing art Master of health; for it
does not make use of it, but looks how it may come to be: so it commands
for the sake of it but does not command it.

The objection is, in fact, about as valid as if a man should say
[Greek: politikae] governs the gods because it gives orders about all
things in the communty.


APPENDIX

On [Greek: epistaemae], from I. Post. Analyt. chap. i. and ii.

(Such parts only are translated as throw light on the Ethics.)

All teaching, and all intellectual learning, proceeds on the basis
of previous knowledge, as will appear on an examination of all. The
Mathematical Sciences, and every other system, draw their conclusions in
this method. So too of reasonings, whether by syllogism, or induction:
for both teach through what is previously known, the former assuming
the premisses as from wise men, the latter proving universals from
the evidentness of the particulars. In like manner too rhetoricians
persuade, either through examples (which amounts to induction), or
through enthymemes (which amounts to syllogism).

Well, we suppose that we _know_ things (in the strict and proper sense
of the word) when we suppose ourselves to know the cause by reason
of which the thing is to be the cause of it; and that this cannot be
otherwise. It is plain that the idea intended to be conveyed by the term
_knowing_ is something of this kind; because they who do not really know
suppose themselves thus related to the matter in hand and they who
do know really are so that of whatsoever there is properly speaking
Knowledge this cannot be otherwise than it is Whether or no there is
another way of knowing we will say afterwards, but we do say that we
know through demonstration, by which I mean a syllogism apt to produce
Knowledge, i.e. in right of which through having it, we know.

If Knowledge then is such as we have described it, the Knowledge
produced by demonstrative reasoning must be drawn from premisses _true_
and _first_, and _incapable of syllogistic proof_, and _better known_,
and _prior in order of time_, and _causes of the conclusion_, for so the
principles will be akin to the conclusion demonstrated.

(Syllogism, of course there may be without such premisses, but it will
not be demonstration because it will not produce knowledge).

_True_, they must be, because it is impossible to know that which is not.

_First_, that is indemonstrable, because, if demonstrable, he cannot be
said to _know_ them who has no demonstration of them for knowing such
things as are demonstrable is the same as having demonstration of them.

_Causes_ they must be, and _better known_, and _prior_ in time,
_causes_, because we then know when we are acquainted with the cause,
and _prior_, if causes, and _known beforehand_, not merely comprehended
in idea but known to exist (The terms prior, and better known, bear two
senses for _prior by nature_ and _prior relatively to ourselves_ are not
the same, nor _better known by nature_, and _better known to us_ I mean,
by _prior_ and _better known relatively to ourselves_, such things as
are nearer to sensation, but abstractedly so such as are further
Those are furthest which are most universal those nearest which are
particulars, and these are mutually opposed) And by _first_, I mean
_principles akin to the conclusion_, for principle means the same as
first And the principle or first step in demonstration is a proposition
incapable of syllogistic proof, i. e. one to which there is none prior.
Now of such syllogistic principles I call that a [Greek: thxsis] which
you cannot demonstrate, and which is unnecessary with a view to learning
something else. That which is necessary in order to learn something else
is an Axiom.

Further, since one is to believe and know the thing by having a
syllogism of the kind called demonstration, and what constitutes it to
be such is the nature of the premisses, it is necessary not merely to
_know before_, but to _know better than the conclusion_, either all or
at least some of, the principles, because that which is the cause of a
quality inhering in something else always inheres itself more as the
cause of our loving is itself more lovable. So, since the principles are
the cause of our knowing and behoving we know and believe them more,
because by reason of them we know also the conclusion following.

Further: the man who is to have the Knowledge which comes through
demonstration must not merely know and believe his principles better
than he does his conclusion, but he must believe nothing more firmly
than the contradictories of those principles out of which the contrary
fallacy may be constructed: since he who _knows_, is to be simply and
absolutely infallible.




BOOK VII



I

Next we must take a different point to start from, and observe that of
what is to be avoided in respect of moral character there are three
forms; Vice, Imperfect Self-Control, and Brutishness. Of the two former
it is plain what the contraries are, for we call the one Virtue, the
other Self-Control; and as answering to Brutishness it will be most
suitable to assign Superhuman, i.e. heroical and godlike Virtue, as, in
Homer, Priam says of Hector "that he was very excellent, nor was he like
the offspring of mortal man, but of a god." and so, if, as is commonly
said, men are raised to the position of gods by reason of very high
excellence in Virtue, the state opposed to the Brutish will plainly be
of this nature: because as brutes are not virtuous or vicious so neither
are gods; but the state of these is something more precious than Virtue,
of the former something different in kind from Vice.

And as, on the one hand, it is a rare thing for a man to be godlike (a
term the Lacedaemonians are accustomed to use when they admire a man
exceedingly; [Greek:seios anh\E6p] they call him), so the brutish man is
rare; the character is found most among barbarians, and some cases of it
are caused by disease or maiming; also such men as exceed in vice all
ordinary measures we therefore designate by this opprobrious term. Well,
we must in a subsequent place make some mention of this disposition,
and Vice has been spoken of before: for the present we must speak of
Imperfect Self-Control and its kindred faults of Softness and Luxury, on
the one hand, and of Self-Control and Endurance on the other; since we
are to conceive of them, not as being the same states exactly as Virtue
and Vice respectively, nor again as differing in kind. [Sidenote:1145b]
And we should adopt the same course as before, i.e. state the phenomena,
and, after raising and discussing difficulties which suggest themselves,
then exhibit, if possible, all the opinions afloat respecting these
affections of the moral character; or, if not all, the greater part and
the most important: for we may consider we have illustrated the matter
sufficiently when the difficulties have been solved, and such theories
as are most approved are left as a residuum.

The chief points may be thus enumerated. It is thought,

I. That Self-Control and Endurance belong to the class of things good
and praiseworthy, while Imperfect Self-Control and Softness belong to
that of things low and blameworthy.

II. That the man of Self-Control is identical with the man who is apt to
abide by his resolution, and the man of Imperfect Self-Control with him
who is apt to depart from his resolution.

III. That the man of Imperfect Self-Control does things at the
instigation of his passions, knowing them to be wrong, while the man of
Self-Control, knowing his lusts to be wrong, refuses, by the influence
of reason, to follow their suggestions.

IV. That the man of Perfected Self-Mastery unites the qualities of
Self-Control and Endurance, and some say that every one who unites these
is a man of Perfect Self-Mastery, others do not.

V. Some confound the two characters of the man who has _no_
Self-Control, and the man of _Imperfect Self-Control_, while others
distinguish between them.

VI. It is sometimes said that the man of Practical Wisdom cannot be a
man of Imperfect Self-Control, sometimes that men who are Practically
Wise and Clever are of Imperfect Self-Control.

VII. Again, men are said to be of Imperfect Self-Control, not simply
but with the addition of the thing wherein, as in respect of anger, of
honour, and gain.

These then are pretty well the common statements.

II

Now a man may raise a question as to the nature of the right conception
in violation of which a man fails of Self-Control.

That he can so fail when _knowing_ in the strict sense what is right
some say is impossible: for it is a strange thing, as Socrates thought,
that while Knowledge is present in his mind something else should
master him and drag him about like a slave. Socrates in fact contended
generally against the theory, maintaining there is no such state as that
of Imperfect Self-Control, for that no one acts contrary to what is best
conceiving it to be best but by reason of ignorance what is best.

With all due respect to Socrates, his account of the matter is at
variance with plain facts, and we must inquire with respect to the
affection, if it be caused by ignorance what is the nature of the
ignorance: for that the man so failing does not suppose his acts to be
right before he is under the influence of passion is quite plain.

There are people who partly agree with Socrates and partly not: that
nothing can be stronger than Knowledge they agree, but that no man acts
in contravention of his conviction of what is better they do not agree;
and so they say that it is not Knowledge, but only Opinion, which the
man in question has and yet yields to the instigation of his pleasures.

[Sidenote:1146a] But then, if it is Opinion and not Knowledge, that is
it the opposing conception be not strong but only mild (as in the case
of real doubt), the not abiding by it in the face of strong lusts would
be excusable: but wickedness is not excusable, nor is anything which
deserves blame.

Well then, is it Practical Wisdom which in this case offers opposition:
for that is the strongest principle? The supposition is absurd, for
we shall have the same man uniting Practical Wisdom and Imperfect
Self-Control, and surely no single person would maintain that it is
consistent with the character of Practical Wisdom to do voluntarily what
is very wrong; and besides we have shown before that the very mark of
a man of this character is aptitude to act, as distinguished from
mere knowledge of what is right; because he is a man conversant with
particular details, and possessed of all the other virtues.

Again, if the having strong and bad lusts is necessary to the idea of
the man of Self-Control, this character cannot be identical with the man
of Perfected Self-Mastery, because the having strong desires or bad ones
does not enter into the idea of this latter character: and yet the man
of Self-Control must have such: for suppose them good; then the moral
state which should hinder a man from following their suggestions must be
bad, and so Self-Control would not be in all cases good: suppose them on
the other hand to be weak and not wrong, it would be nothing grand; nor
anything great, supposing them to be wrong and weak.

Again, if Self-Control makes a man apt to abide by all opinions without
exception, it may be bad, as suppose the case of a false opinion: and
if Imperfect Self-Control makes a man apt to depart from all without
exception, we shall have cases where it will be good; take that of
Neoptolemus in the Philoctetes of Sophocles, for instance: he is to be
praised for not abiding by what he was persuaded to by Ulysses, because
he was pained at being guilty of falsehood.

Or again, false sophistical reasoning presents a difficulty: for because
men wish to prove paradoxes that they may be counted clever when they
succeed, the reasoning that has been used becomes a difficulty: for the
intellect is fettered; a man being unwilling to abide by the conclusion
because it does not please his judgment, but unable to advance because
he cannot disentangle the web of sophistical reasoning.

Or again, it is conceivable on this supposition that folly joined with
Imperfect Self-Control may turn out, in a given case, goodness: for by
reason of his imperfection of self-control a man acts in a way which
contradicts his notions; now his notion is that what is really good is
bad and ought not to be done; and so he will eventually do what is good
and not what is bad.

Again, on the same supposition, the man who acting on conviction pursues
and chooses things because they are pleasant must be thought a better
man than he who does so not by reason of a quasi-rational conviction but
of Imperfect Self-Control: because he is more open to cure by reason of
the possibility of his receiving a contrary conviction. But to the man
of Imperfect Self-Control would apply the proverb, "when water chokes,
what should a man drink then?" for had he never been convinced at all
in respect of [Sidenote: 1146b] what he does, then by a conviction in a
contrary direction he might have stopped in his course; but now though
he has had convictions he notwithstanding acts against them.

Again, if any and every thing is the object-matter of Imperfect and
Perfect Self-Control, who is the man of Imperfect Self-Control simply?
because no one unites all cases of it, and we commonly say that some men
are so simply, not adding any particular thing in which they are so.

Well, the difficulties raised are pretty near such as I have described
them, and of these theories we must remove some and leave others as
established; because the solving of a difficulty is a positive act of
establishing something as true.

III

Now we must examine first whether men of Imperfect Self-Control act with
a knowledge of what is right or not: next, if with such knowledge, in
what sense; and next what are we to assume is the object-matter of the
man of Imperfect Self-Control, and of the man of Self-Control; I mean,
whether pleasure and pain of all kinds or certain definite ones; and as
to Self-Control and Endurance, whether these are designations of the
same character or different. And in like manner we must go into all
questions which are connected with the present.

But the real starting point of the inquiry is, whether the two
characters of Self-Control and Imperfect Self-Control are distinguished
by their object-matter, or their respective relations to it. I mean,
whether the man of Imperfect Self-Control is such simply by virtue of
having such and such object-matter; or not, but by virtue of his being
related to it in such and such a way, or by virtue of both: next,
whether Self-Control and Imperfect Self-Control are unlimited in their
object-matter: because he who is designated without any addition a man
of Imperfect Self-Control is not unlimited in his object-matter, but has
exactly the same as the man who has lost all Self-Control: nor is he so
designated because of his relation to this object-matter merely (for
then his character would be identical with that just mentioned, loss
of all Self-Control), but because of his relation to it being such
and such. For the man who has lost all Self-Control is led on with
deliberate moral choice, holding that it is his line to pursue pleasure
as it rises: while the man of Imperfect Self-Control does not think that
he ought to pursue it, but does pursue it all the same.

Now as to the notion that it is True Opinion and not Knowledge in
contravention of which men fail in Self-Control, it makes no difference
to the point in question, because some of those who hold Opinions have
no doubt about them but suppose themselves to have accurate Knowledge;
if then it is urged that men holding Opinions will be more likely than
men who have Knowledge to act in contravention of their conceptions,
as having but a moderate belief in them; we reply, Knowledge will not
differ in this respect from Opinion: because some men believe their
own Opinions no less firmly than others do their positive Knowledge:
Heraclitus is a case in point.

Rather the following is the account of it: the term _knowing_ has two
senses; both the man who does not use his Knowledge, and he who does,
are said to _know_: there will be a difference between a man's acting
wrongly, who though possessed of Knowledge does not call it into
operation, and his doing so who has it and actually exercises it: the
latter is a strange case, but the mere having, if not exercising,
presents no anomaly.

[Sidenote:1147a] Again, as there are two kinds of propositions affecting
action, universal and particular, there is no reason why a man may not
act against his Knowledge, having both propositions in his mind, using
the universal but not the particular, for the particulars are the
objects of moral action.

There is a difference also in universal propositions; a universal
proposition may relate partly to a man's self and partly to the thing in
question: take the following for instance; "dry food is good for every
man," this may have the two minor premisses, "this is a man," and "so
and so is dry food;" but whether a given substance is so and so a man
either has not the Knowledge or does not exert it. According to these
different senses there will be an immense difference, so that for a
man to _know_ in the one sense, and yet act wrongly, would be nothing
strange, but in any of the other senses it would be a matter for wonder.

Again, men may have Knowledge in a way different from any of those which
have been now stated: for we constantly see a man's state so differing
by having and not using Knowledge, that he has it in a sense and also
has not; when a man is asleep, for instance, or mad, or drunk: well, men
under the actual operation of passion are in exactly similar conditions;
for anger, lust, and some other such-like things, manifestly make
changes even in the body, and in some they even cause madness; it is
plain then that we must say the men of Imperfect Self-Control are in a
state similar to these.

And their saying what embodies Knowledge is no proof of their actually
then exercising it, because they who are under the operation of these
passions repeat demonstrations; or verses of Empedocles, just as
children, when first learning, string words together, but as yet know
nothing of their meaning, because they must grow into it, and this is a
process requiring time: so that we must suppose these men who fail in
Self-Control to say these moral sayings just as actors do. Furthermore,
a man may look at the account of the ph\E6nomenon in the following way,
from an examination of the actual working of the mind: All action may
be analysed into a syllogism, in which the one premiss is an universal
maxim and the other concerns particulars of which Sense [moral or
physical, as the case may be] is cognisant: now when one results from
these two, it follows necessarily that, as far as theory goes the mind
must assert the conclusion, and in practical propositions the man must
act accordingly. For instance, let the universal be, "All that is
sweet should be tasted," the particular, "This is sweet;" it follows
necessarily that he who is able and is not hindered should not only
draw, but put in practice, the conclusion "This is to be tasted." When
then there is in the mind one universal proposition forbidding to taste,
and the other "All that is sweet is pleasant" with its minor "This is
sweet" (which is the one that really works), and desire happens to be in
the man, the first universal bids him avoid this but the desire leads
him on to taste; for it has the power of moving the various organs:
and so it results that he fails in Self-Control, [Sidenote:1147b] in a
certain sense under the influence of Reason and Opinion not contrary in
itself to Reason but only accidentally so; because it is the desire that
is contrary to Right Reason, but not the Opinion: and so for this reason
brutes are not accounted of Imperfect Self-Control, because they have
no power of conceiving universals but only of receiving and retaining
particular impressions.

As to the manner in which the ignorance is removed and the man of
Imperfect Self-Control recovers his Knowledge, the account is the same
as with respect to him who is drunk or asleep, and is not peculiar to
this affection, so physiologists are the right people to apply to. But
whereas the minor premiss of every practical syllogism is an opinion on
matter cognisable by Sense and determines the actions; he who is under
the influence of passion either has not this, or so has it that his
having does not amount to _knowing_ but merely saying, as a man when
drunk might repeat Empedocles' verses; and because the minor term
is neither universal, nor is thought to have the power of producing
Knowledge in like manner as the universal term: and so the result which
Socrates was seeking comes out, that is to say, the affection does not
take place in the presence of that which is thought to be specially
and properly Knowledge, nor is this dragged about by reason of the
affection, but in the presence of that Knowledge which is conveyed by
Sense.

Let this account then be accepted of the question respecting the failure
in Self-Control, whether it is with Knowledge or not; and, if with
knowledge, with what kind of knowledge such failure is possible.

IV

The next question to be discussed is whether there is a character to be
designated by the term "of Imperfect Self-Control" simply, or whether
all who are so are to be accounted such, in respect of some particular
thing; and, if there is such a character, what is his object-matter.

Now that pleasures and pains are the object-matter of men of
Self-Control and of Endurance, and also of men of Imperfect Self-Control
and Softness, is plain.

Further, things which produce pleasure are either necessary, or objects
of choice in themselves but yet admitting of excess. All bodily things
which produce pleasure are necessary; and I call such those which relate
to food and other grosser appetities, in short such bodily things as
we assumed were the Object-matter of absence of Self-Control and of
Perfected Self-Mastery.

The other class of objects are not necessary, but objects of choice in
themselves: I mean, for instance, victory, honour, wealth, and such-like
good or pleasant things. And those who are excessive in their liking for
such things contrary to the principle of Right Reason which is in their
own breasts we do not designate men of Imperfect Self-Control simply,
but with the addition of the thing wherein, as in respect of money, or
gain, or honour, or anger, and not simply; because we consider them as
different characters and only having that title in right of a kind of
resemblance (as when we add to a man's name "conqueror in the Olympic
games" the account of him as Man differs but little from the account
of him as the Man who conquered in the Olympic games, but still it is
different). And a proof of the real [Sidenote: 1148a] difference between
these so designated with an addition and those simply so called is this,
that Imperfect Self-Control is blamed, not as an error merely but also
as being a vice, either wholly or partially; but none of these other
cases is so blamed.

But of those who have for their object-matter the bodily enjoyments,
which we say are also the object-matter of the man of Perfected
Self-Mastery and the man who has lost all Self-Control, he that pursues
excessive pleasures and too much avoids things which are painful (as
hunger and thirst, heat and cold, and everything connected with touch
and taste), not from moral choice but in spite of his moral choice and
intellectual conviction, is termed "a man of Imperfect Self-Control,"
not with the addition of any particular object-matter as we do in
respect of want of control of anger but simply.

And a proof that the term is thus applied is that the kindred term
"Soft" is used in respect of these enjoyments but not in respect of any
of those others. And for this reason we put into the same rank the man
of Imperfect Self-Control, the man who has lost it entirely, the man
who has it, and the man of Perfected Self-Mastery; but not any of those
other characters, because the former have for their object-matter the
same pleasures and pains: but though they have the same object-matter,
they are not related to it in the same way, but two of them act upon
moral choice, two without it. And so we should say that man is more
entirely given up to his passions who pursues excessive pleasures, and
avoids moderate pains, being either not at all, or at least but little,
urged by desire, than the man who does so because his desire is very
strong: because we think what would the former be likely to do if he had
the additional stimulus of youthful lust and violent pain consequent on
the want of those pleasures which we have denominated necessary?

Well then, since of desires and pleasures there are some which are in
kind honourable and good (because things pleasant are divisible, as we
said before, into such as are naturally objects of choice, such as
are naturally objects of avoidance, and such as are in themselves
indifferent, money, gain, honour, victory, for instance); in respect of
all such and those that are indifferent, men are blamed not merely for
being affected by or desiring or liking them, but for exceeding in any
way in these feelings.

And so they are blamed, whosoever in spite of Reason are mastered by,
that is pursue, any object, though in its nature noble and good; they,
for instance, who are more earnest than they should be respecting
honour, or their children or parents; not but what these are good
objects and men are praised for being earnest about them: but still they
admit of excess; for instance, if any one, as Niobe did, should fight
even against the gods, or feel towards his father as Satyrus, who got
therefrom the nickname of [Greek: philophator], [Sidenote: 1148b]
because he was thought to be very foolish.

Now depravity there is none in regard of these things, for the reason
assigned above, that each of them in itself is a thing naturally
choiceworthy, yet the excesses in respect of them are wrong and matter
for blame: and similarly there is no Imperfect Self-Control in respect
of these things; that being not merely a thing that should be avoided
but blameworthy.

But because of the resemblance of the affection to the Imperfection of
Self-Control the term is used with the addition in each case of the
particular object-matter, just as men call a man a bad physician, or bad
actor, whom they would not think of calling simply bad. As then in these
cases we do not apply the term simply because each of the states is not
a vice, but only like a vice in the way of analogy, so it is plain that
in respect of Imperfect Self-Control and Self-Control we must limit the
names to those states which have the same object-matter as Perfected
Self-Mastery and utter loss of Self-Control, and that we do apply it to
the case of anger only in the way of resemblance: for which reason, with
an addition, we designate a man of Imperfect Self-Control in respect of
anger, as of honour or of gain.

V

As there are some things naturally pleasant, and of these two kinds;
those, namely, which are pleasant generally, and those which are so
relatively to particular kinds of animals and men; so there are others
which are not naturally pleasant but which come to be so in consequence
either of maimings, or custom, or depraved natural tastes: and one may
observe moral states similar to those we have been speaking of, having
respectively these classes of things for their object-matter.

I mean the Brutish, as in the case of the female who, they say, would
rip up women with child and eat the foetus; or the tastes which are
found among the savage tribes bordering on the Pontus, some liking raw
flesh, and some being cannibals, and some lending one another their
children to make feasts of; or what is said of Phalaris. These are
instances of Brutish states, caused in some by disease or madness; take,
for instance, the man who sacrificed and ate his mother, or him who
devoured the liver of his fellow-servant. Instances again of those
caused by disease or by custom, would be, plucking out of hair, or
eating one's nails, or eating coals and earth. ... Now wherever nature
is really the cause no one would think of calling men of Imperfect
Self-Control, ... nor, in like manner, such as are in a diseased state
through custom.

[Sidenote:1149a] Obviously the having any of these inclinations is
something foreign to what is denominated Vice, just as Brutishness is:
and when a man has them his mastering them is not properly Self-Control,
nor his being mastered by them Imperfection of Self-Control in the
proper sense, but only in the way of resemblance; just as we may say a
man of ungovernable wrath fails of Self-Control in respect of anger but
not simply fails of Self-Control. For all excessive folly, cowardice,
absence of Self-Control, or irritability, are either Brutish or morbid.
The man, for instance, who is naturally afraid of all things, even if
a mouse should stir, is cowardly after a Brutish sort; there was a man
again who, by reason of disease, was afraid of a cat: and of the fools,
they who are naturally destitute of Reason and live only by Sense are
Brutish, as are some tribes of the far-off barbarians, while others
who are so by reason of diseases, epileptic or frantic, are in morbid
states.

So then, of these inclinations, a man may sometimes merely have one
without yielding to it: I mean, suppose that Phalaris had restrained his
unnatural desire to eat a child: or he may both have and yield to it. As
then Vice when such as belongs to human nature is called Vice simply,
while the other is so called with the addition of "brutish" or "morbid,"
but not simply Vice, so manifestly there is Brutish and Morbid
Imperfection of Self-Control, but that alone is entitled to the name
without any qualification which is of the nature of utter absence of
Self-Control, as it is found in Man.

VI

It is plain then that the object-matter of Imperfect Self-Control and
Self-Control is restricted to the same as that of utter absence of
Self-Control and that of Perfected Self-Mastery, and that the rest is
the object-matter of a different species so named metaphorically and not
simply: we will now examine the position, "that Imperfect Self-Control
in respect of Anger is less disgraceful than that in respect of Lusts."

In the first place, it seems that Anger does in a way listen to Reason
but mishears it; as quick servants who run out before they have heard
the whole of what is said and then mistake the order; dogs, again, bark
at the slightest stir, before they have seen whether it be friend
or foe; just so Anger, by reason of its natural heat and quickness,
listening to Reason, but without having heard the command of Reason,
rushes to its revenge. That is to say, Reason or some impression on the
mind shows there is insolence or contempt in the offender, and then
Anger, reasoning as it were that one ought to fight against what is
such, fires up immediately: whereas Lust, if Reason or Sense, as the
case may be, merely says a thing is sweet, rushes to the enjoyment of
it: and so Anger follows Reason in a manner, but Lust does not and is
therefore more disgraceful: because he that cannot control his anger
yields in a manner to Reason, but the other to his Lust and not to
Reason at all. [Sidenote:1149b]

Again, a man is more excusable for following such desires as are
natural, just as he is for following such Lusts as are common to all and
to that degree in which they are common. Now Anger and irritability are
more natural than Lusts when in excess and for objects not necessary.
(This was the ground of the defence the man made who beat his father,
"My father," he said, "used to beat his, and his father his again, and
this little fellow here," pointing to his child, "will beat me when he
is grown a man: it runs in the family." And the father, as he was being
dragged along, bid his son leave off beating him at the door, because he
had himself been used to drag his father so far and no farther.)

Again, characters are less unjust in proportion as they involve less
insidiousness. Now the Angry man is not insidious, nor is Anger, but
quite open: but Lust is: as they say of Venus,

  "Cyprus-born Goddess, _weaver of deceits_"

Or Homer of the girdle called the Cestus,

  "Persuasiveness _cheating_ e'en the subtlest mind."

And so since this kind of Imperfect Self-Control is more unjust, it
is also more disgraceful than that in respect of Anger, and is simply
Imperfect Self-Control, and Vice in a certain sense. Again, no man feels
pain in being insolent, but every one who acts through Anger does act
with pain; and he who acts insolently does it with pleasure. If then
those things are most unjust with which we have most right to be angry,
then Imperfect Self-Control, arising from Lust, is more so than that
arising from Anger: because in Anger there is no insolence.

Well then, it is clear that Imperfect Self-Control in respect of
Lusts is more disgraceful than that in respect of Anger, and that the
object-matter of Self-Control, and the Imperfection of it, are bodily
Lusts and pleasures; but of these last we must take into account the
differences; for, as was said at the commencement, some are proper to
the human race and natural both in kind and degree, others Brutish, and
others caused by maimings and diseases.

Now the first of these only are the object-matter of Perfected
Self-Mastery and utter absence of Self-Control; and therefore we never
attribute either of these states to Brutes (except metaphorically,
and whenever any one kind of animal differs entirely from another in
insolence, mischievousness, or voracity), because they have not moral
choice or process of deliberation, but are quite different from that
kind of creature just as are madmen from other men.

[Sidenote: 1150a] Brutishness is not so low in the scale as Vice, yet
it is to be regarded with more fear: because it is not that the highest
principle has been corrupted, as in the human creature, but the subject
has it not at all.

It is much the same, therefore, as if one should compare an inanimate
with an animate being, which were the worse: for the badness of that
which has no principle of origination is always less harmful; now
Intellect is a principle of origination. A similar case would be the
comparing injustice and an unjust man together: for in different ways
each is the worst: a bad man would produce ten thousand times as much
harm as a bad brute.

VII

Now with respect to the pleasures and pains which come to a man through
Touch and Taste, and the desiring or avoiding such (which we determined
before to constitute the object-matter of the states of utter absence of
Self-Control and Perfected Self-Mastery), one may be so disposed as
to yield to temptations to which most men would be superior, or to
be superior to those to which most men would yield: in respect of
pleasures, these characters will be respectively the man of Imperfect
Self-Control, and the man of Self-Control; and, in respect of pains, the
man of Softness and the man of Endurance: but the moral state of most
men is something between the two, even though they lean somewhat to the
worse characters.

Again, since of the pleasures indicated some are necessary and some are
not, others are so to a certain degree but not the excess or defect of
them, and similarly also of Lusts and pains, the man who pursues the
excess of pleasant things, or such as are in themselves excess, or from
moral choice, for their own sake, and not for anything else which is to
result from them, is a man utterly void of Self-Control: for he must be
incapable of remorse, and so incurable, because he that has not remorse
is incurable. (He that has too little love of pleasure is the opposite
character, and the man of Perfected Self-Mastery the mean character.) He
is of a similar character who avoids the bodily pains, not because he
_cannot_, but because he _chooses not to_, withstand them.

But of the characters who go wrong without _choosing_ so to do, the one
is led on by reason of pleasure, the other because he avoids the pain it
would cost him to deny his lust; and so they are different the one from
the other. Now every one would pronounce a man worse for doing something
base without any impulse of desire, or with a very slight one, than for
doing the same from the impulse of a very strong desire; for striking
a man when not angry than if he did so in wrath: because one naturally
says, "What would he have done had he been under the influence of
passion?" (and on this ground, by the bye, the man utterly void of
Self-Control is worse than he who has it imperfectly). However, of the
two characters which have been mentioned [as included in that of utter
absence of Self-Control], the one is rather Softness, the other properly
the man of no Self-Control.

Furthermore, to the character of Imperfect Self-Control is opposed that
of Self-Control, and to that of Softness that of Endurance: because
Endurance consists in continued resistance but Self-Control in actual
mastery, and continued resistance and actual mastery are as different
as not being conquered is from conquering; and so Self-Control is more
choiceworthy than Endurance.

[Sidenote:1150b] Again, he who fails when exposed to those temptations
against which the common run of men hold out, and are well able to do
so, is Soft and Luxurious (Luxury being a kind of Softness): the kind of
man, I mean, to let his robe drag in the dirt to avoid the trouble
of lifting it, and who, aping the sick man, does not however suppose
himself wretched though he is like a wretched man. So it is too with
respect to Self-Control and the Imperfection of it: if a man yields to
pleasures or pains which are violent and excessive it is no matter for
wonder, but rather for allowance if he made what resistance he could
(instances are, Philoctetes in Theodectes' drama when wounded by the
viper; or Cercyon in the Alope of Carcinus, or men who in trying to
suppress laughter burst into a loud continuous fit of it, as happened,
you remember, to Xenophantus), but it is a matter for wonder when a man
yields to and cannot contend against those pleasures or pains which the
common herd are able to resist; always supposing his failure not to be
owing to natural constitution or disease, I mean, as the Scythian kings
are constitutionally Soft, or the natural difference between the sexes.

Again, the man who is a slave to amusement is commonly thought to be
destitute of Self-Control, but he really is Soft; because amusement
is an act of relaxing, being an act of resting, and the character in
question is one of those who exceed due bounds in respect of this.

Moreover of Imperfect Self-Control there are two forms, Precipitancy and
Weakness: those who have it in the latter form though they have made
resolutions do not abide by them by reason of passion; the others are
led by passion because they have never formed any resolutions at
all: while there are some who, like those who by tickling themselves
beforehand get rid of ticklishness, having felt and seen beforehand the
approach of temptation, and roused up themselves and their resolution,
yield not to passion; whether the temptation be somewhat pleasant or
somewhat painful. The Precipitate form of Imperfect Self-Control they
are most liable to who are constitutionally of a sharp or melancholy
temperament: because the one by reason of the swiftness, the other by
reason of the violence, of their passions, do not wait for Reason,
because they are disposed to follow whatever notion is impressed upon
their minds.

VIII

Again, the man utterly destitute of Self-Control, as was observed
before, is not given to remorse: for it is part of his character that
he abides by his moral choice: but the man of Imperfect Self-Control is
almost made up of remorse: and so the case is not as we determined it
before, but the former is incurable and the latter may be cured: for
depravity is like chronic diseases, dropsy and consumption for instance,
but Imperfect Self-Control is like acute disorders: the former being a
continuous evil, the latter not so. And, in fact, Imperfect Self-Control
and Confirmed Vice are different in kind: the latter being imperceptible
to its victim, the former not so.

[Sidenote: 1151a] But, of the different forms of Imperfect Self-Control,
those are better who are carried off their feet by a sudden access of
temptation than they who have Reason but do not abide by it; these
last being overcome by passion less in degree, and not wholly without
premeditation as are the others: for the man of Imperfect Self-Control
is like those who are soon intoxicated and by little wine and less than
the common run of men. Well then, that Imperfection of Self-Control is
not Confirmed Viciousness is plain: and yet perhaps it is such in a way,
because in one sense it is contrary to moral choice and in another the
result of it: at all events, in respect of the actions, the case is much
like what Demodocus said of the Miletians. "The people of Miletus are
not fools, but they do just the kind of things that fools do;" and so
they of Imperfect Self-Control are not unjust, but they do unjust acts.

But to resume. Since the man of Imperfect Self-Control is of such a
character as to follow bodily pleasures in excess and in defiance of
Right Reason, without acting on any deliberate conviction, whereas the
man utterly destitute of Self-Control does act upon a conviction which
rests on his natural inclination to follow after these pleasures; the
former may be easily persuaded to a different course, but the latter
not: for Virtue and Vice respectively preserve and corrupt the moral
principle; now the motive is the principle or starting point in moral
actions, just as axioms and postulates are in mathematics: and neither
in morals nor mathematics is it Reason which is apt to teach the
principle; but Excellence, either natural or acquired by custom, in
holding right notions with respect to the principle. He who does this in
morals is the man of Perfected Self-Mastery, and the contrary character
is the man utterly destitute of Self-Control.

Again, there is a character liable to be taken off his feet in defiance
of Right Reason because of passion; whom passion so far masters as to
prevent his acting in accordance with Right Reason, but not so far as to
make him be convinced that it is his proper line to follow after such
pleasures without limit: this character is the man of Imperfect Self-
Control, better than he who is utterly destitute of it, and not a bad
man simply and without qualification: because in him the highest and
best part, i.e. principle, is preserved: and there is another character
opposed to him who is apt to abide by his resolutions, and not to depart
from them; at all events, not at the instigation of passion. It is
evident then from all this, that Self-Control is a good state and the
Imperfection of it a bad one.

Next comes the question, whether a man is a man of Self-Control for
abiding by his conclusions and moral choice be they of what kind they
may, or only by the right one; or again, a man of Imperfect Self-Control
for not abiding by his conclusions and moral choice be they of whatever
kind; or, to put the case we did before, is he such for not abiding by
false conclusions and wrong moral choice?

Is not this the truth, that _incidentally_ it is by conclusions and
moral choice of any kind that the one character abides and the other
does not, but _per se_ true conclusions and right moral choice: to
explain what is meant by incidentally, and _per se_; suppose a man
chooses or pursues this thing for the sake of that, he is said to pursue
and choose that _per se_, but this only incidentally. For the term _per
se_ we use commonly the word "simply," and so, in a way, it is opinion
of any kind soever by which the two characters respectively abide or
not, but he is "simply" entitled to the designations who abides or not
by the true opinion.

There are also people, who have a trick of abiding by their, own
opinions, who are commonly called Positive, as they who are hard to
be persuaded, and whose convictions are not easily changed: now these
people bear some resemblance to the character of Self-Control, just as
the prodigal to the liberal or the rash man to the brave, but they are
different in many points. The man of Self-Control does not change by
reason of passion and lust, yet when occasion so requires he will be
easy of persuasion: but the Positive man changes not at the call of
Reason, though many of this class take up certain desires and are led by
their pleasures. Among the class of Positive are the Opinionated, the
Ignorant, and the Bearish: the first, from the motives of pleasure and
pain: I mean, they have the pleasurable feeling of a kind of victory in
not having their convictions changed, and they are pained when their
decrees, so to speak, are reversed: so that, in fact, they rather
resemble the man of Imperfect Self-Control than the man of Self-Control.

Again, there are some who depart from their resolutions not by reason of
any Imperfection of Self-Control; take, for instance, Neoptolemus in the
Philoctetes of Sophocles. Here certainly pleasure was the motive of his
departure from his resolution, but then it was one of a noble sort:
for to be truthful was noble in his eyes and he had been persuaded by
Ulysses to lie.

So it is not every one who acts from the motive of pleasure who is
utterly destitute of Self-Control or base or of Imperfect Self-Control,
only he who acts from the impulse of a base pleasure.

Moreover as there is a character who takes less pleasure than he ought
in bodily enjoyments, and he also fails to abide by the conclusion of
his Reason, the man of Self-Control is the mean between him and the man
of Imperfect Self-Control: that is to say, the latter fails to abide by
them because of somewhat too much, the former because of somewhat too
little; while the man of Self-Control abides by them, and never changes
by reason of anything else than such conclusions.

Now of course since Self-Control is good both the contrary States must
be bad, as indeed they plainly are: but because the one of them is seen
in few persons, and but rarely in them, Self-Control comes to be
viewed as if opposed only to the Imperfection of it, just as
Perfected Self-Mastery is thought to be opposed only to utter want of
Self-Control.

[Sidenote: 1152a] Again, as many terms are used in the way of
similitude, so people have come to talk of the Self-Control of the man
of Perfected Self-Mastery in the way of similitude: for the man of
Self-Control and the man of Perfected Self-Mastery have this in common,
that they do nothing against Right Reason on the impulse of bodily
pleasures, but then the former has bad desires, the latter not; and the
latter is so constituted as not even to feel pleasure contrary to his
Reason, the former feels but does not yield to it. Like again are the
man of Imperfect Self-Control and he who is utterly destitute of it,
though in reality distinct: both follow bodily pleasures, but the latter
under a notion that it is the proper line for him to take, his former
without any such notion.



X

And it is not possible for the same man to be at once a man of Practical
Wisdom and of Imperfect Self-Control: because the character of Practical
Wisdom includes, as we showed before, goodness of moral character.
And again, it is not knowledge merely, but aptitude for action, which
constitutes Practical Wisdom: and of this aptitude the man of Imperfect
Self-Control is destitute. But there is no reason why the Clever man
should not be of Imperfect Self-Control: and the reason why some men are
occasionally thought to be men of Practical Wisdom, and yet of Imperfect
Self-Control, is this, that Cleverness differs from Practical Wisdom in
the way I stated in a former book, and is very near it so far as the
intellectual element is concerned but differs in respect of the moral
choice.

Nor is the man of Imperfect Self-Control like the man who both has and
calls into exercise his knowledge, but like the man who, having it, is
overpowered by sleep or wine. Again, he acts voluntarily (because he
knows, in a certain sense, what he does and the result of it), but he is
not a confirmed bad man, for his moral choice is good, so he is at all
events only half bad. Nor is he unjust, because he does not act with
deliberate intent: for of the two chief forms of the character, the one
is not apt to abide by his deliberate resolutions, and the other, the
man of constitutional strength of passion, is not apt to deliberate at
all.

So in fact the man of Imperfect Self-Control is like a community which
makes all proper enactments, and has admirable laws, only does not act
on them, verifying the scoff of Anaxandrides,

  "That State did will it, which cares nought for laws;"
whereas the bad man is like one which acts upon its laws, but then
unfortunately they are bad ones. Imperfection of Self-Control and
Self-Control, after all, are above the average state of men; because he
of the latter character is more true to his Reason, and the former less
so, than is in the power of most men.

Again, of the two forms of Imperfect Self-Control that is more easily
cured which they have who are constitutionally of strong passions, than
that of those who form resolutions and break them; and they that are so
through habituation than they that are so naturally; since of course
custom is easier to change than nature, because the very resemblance of
custom to nature is what constitutes the difficulty of changing it; as
Evenus says,

  "Practice, I say, my friend, doth long endure,
  And at the last is even very nature."

We have now said then what Self-Control is, what Imperfection of
Self-Control, what Endurance, and what Softness, and how these states
are mutually related.

XI

[Sidenote: II52b]

To consider the subject of Pleasure and Pain falls within the province
of the Social-Science Philosopher, since he it is who has to fix the
Master-End which is to guide us in dominating any object absolutely evil
or good.

But we may say more: an inquiry into their nature is absolutely
necessary. First, because we maintained that Moral Virtue and Moral Vice
are both concerned with Pains and Pleasures: next, because the greater
part of mankind assert that Happiness must include Pleasure (which by
the way accounts for the word they use, makarioz; chaireiu being the
root of that word).

Now some hold that no one Pleasure is good, either in itself or as a
matter of result, because Good and Pleasure are not identical. Others
that some Pleasures are good but the greater number bad. There is yet a
third view; granting that every Pleasure is good, still the Chief Good
cannot possibly be Pleasure.

In support of the first opinion (that Pleasure is utterly not-good) it
is urged that:

I. Every Pleasure is a sensible process towards a complete state; but
no such process is akin to the end to be attained: _e.g._ no process of
building to the completed house.

2. The man of Perfected Self-Mastery avoids Pleasures.

3. The man of Practical Wisdom aims at avoiding Pain, not at attaining
Pleasure.

4. Pleasures are an impediment to thought, and the more so the more
keenly they are felt. An obvious instance will readily occur.

5. Pleasure cannot be referred to any Art: and yet every good is the
result of some Art.

6. Children and brutes pursue Pleasures.

In support of the second (that not all Pleasures are good), That there
are some base and matter of reproach, and some even hurtful: because
some things that are pleasant produce disease.

In support of the third (that Pleasure is not the Chief Good), That it
is not an End but a process towards creating an End.

This is, I think, a fair account of current views on the matter.

XII


But that the reasons alleged do not prove it either to be not-good or
the Chief Good is plain from the following considerations.

First. Good being either absolute or relative, of course the natures and
states embodying it will be so too; therefore also the movements and the
processes of creation. So, of those which are thought to be bad
some will be bad absolutely, but relatively not bad, perhaps even
choiceworthy; some not even choiceworthy relatively to any particular
person, only at certain times or for a short time but not in themselves
choiceworthy.

Others again are not even Pleasures at all though they produce that
impression on the mind: all such I mean as imply pain and whose purpose
is cure; those of sick people, for instance.

Next, since Good may be either an active working or a state, those
[Greek: _kinaeseis_ or _geneseis_] which tend to place us in our natural
state are pleasant incidentally because of that *[Sidenote: 1153a]
tendency: but the active working is really in the desires excited in the
remaining (sound) part of our state or nature: for there are Pleasures
which have no connection with pain or desire: the acts of contemplative
intellect, for instance, in which case there is no deficiency in the
nature or state of him who performs the acts.

A proof of this is that the same pleasant thing does not produce the
sensation of Pleasure when the natural state is being filled up or
completed as when it is already in its normal condition: in this latter
case what give the sensation are things pleasant _per se_, in the former
even those things which are contrary. I mean, you find people taking
pleasure in sharp or bitter things of which no one is naturally or in
itself pleasant; of course not therefore the Pleasures arising from
them, because it is obvious that as is the classification of pleasant
things such must be that of the Pleasures arising from them.

Next, it does not follow that there must be something else better than
any given pleasure because (as some say) the End must be better than
the process which creates it. For it is not true that all Pleasures
are processes or even attended by any process, but (some are) active
workings or even Ends: in fact they result not from our coming to be
something but from our using our powers. Again, it is not true that the
End is, in every case, distinct from the process: it is true only in
the case of such processes as conduce to the perfecting of the natural
state.

For which reason it is wrong to say that Pleasure is "a sensible process
of production." For "process etc." should be substituted "active working
of the natural state," for "sensible" "unimpeded." The reason of its
being thought to be a "process etc." is that it is good in the highest
sense: people confusing "active working" and "process," whereas they
really are distinct.

Next, as to the argument that there are bad Pleasures because some
things which are pleasant are also hurtful to health, it is the same as
saying that some healthful things are bad for "business." In this sense,
of course, both may be said to be bad, but then this does not make
them out to be bad _simpliciter_: the exercise of the pure Intellect
sometimes hurts a man's health: but what hinders Practical Wisdom or
any state whatever is, not the Pleasure peculiar to, but some Pleasure
foreign to it: the Pleasures arising from the exercise of the pure
Intellect or from learning only promote each.

Next. "No Pleasure is the work of any Art." What else would you expect?
No active working is the work of any Art, only the faculty of so
working. Still the perfumer's Art or the cook's are thought to belong to
Pleasure.

Next. "The man of Perfected Self-Mastery avoids Pleasures." "The man
of Practical Wisdom aims at escaping Pain rather than at attaining
Pleasure."

"Children and brutes pursue Pleasures."

One answer will do for all.

We have already said in what sense all Pleasures are good _per se_ and
in what sense not all are good: it is the latter class that brutes and
children pursue, such as are accompanied by desire and pain, that is the
bodily Pleasures (which answer to this description) and the excesses of
them: in short, those in respect of which the man utterly destitute of
Self-Control is thus utterly destitute. And it is the absence of the
pain arising from these Pleasures that the man of Practical Wisdom
aims at. It follows that these Pleasures are what the man of Perfected
Self-Mastery avoids: for obviously he has Pleasures peculiarly his own.

[Sidenote: XIII 1153_b_] Then again, it is allowed that Pain is an evil
and a thing to be avoided partly as bad _per se_, partly as being a
hindrance in some particular way. Now the contrary of that which is to
be avoided, _qu\E2_ it is to be avoided, _i.e._ evil, is good. Pleasure
then must be _a_ good.

The attempted answer of Speusippus, "that Pleasure may be opposed and
yet not contrary to Pain, just as the greater portion of any magnitude
is contrary to the less but only opposed to the exact half," will not
hold: for he cannot say that Pleasure is identical with evil of any
kind. Again. Granting that some Pleasures are low, there is no reason
why some particular Pleasure may not be very good, just as some
particular Science may be although there are some which are low.

Perhaps it even follows, since each state may have active working
unimpeded, whether the active workings of all be Happiness or that of
some one of them, that this active working, if it be unimpeded, must be
choiceworthy: now Pleasure is exactly this. So that the Chief Good may
be Pleasure of some kind, though most Pleasures be (let us assume) low
_per se_.

And for this reason all men think the happy life is pleasant, and
interweave Pleasure with Happiness. Reasonably enough: because Happiness
is perfect, but no impeded active working is perfect; and therefore
the happy man needs as an addition the goods of the body and the goods
external and fortune that in these points he may not be fettered. As for
those who say that he who is being tortured on the wheel, or falls into
great misfortunes is happy provided only he be good, they talk nonsense,
whether they mean to do so or not. On the other hand, because fortune
is needed as an addition, some hold good fortune to be identical with
Happiness: which it is not, for even this in excess is a hindrance, and
perhaps then has no right to be called good fortune since it is good
only in so far as it contributes to Happiness.

The fact that all animals, brute and human alike, pursue Pleasure, is
some presumption of its being in a sense the Chief Good;

("There must be something in what most folks say,") only as one and
the same nature or state neither is nor is thought to be the best, so
neither do all pursue the same Pleasure, Pleasure nevertheless all do.
Nay further, what they pursue is, perhaps, not what they think nor what
they would say they pursue, but really one and the same: for in all
there is some instinct above themselves. But the bodily Pleasures have
received the name exclusively, because theirs is the most frequent form
and that which is universally partaken of; and so, because to many these
alone are known they believe them to be the only ones which exist.

[Sidenote: II54a]

It is plain too that, unless Pleasure and its active working be good, it
will not be true that the happy man's life embodies Pleasure: for why
will he want it on the supposition that it is not good and that he can
live even with Pain? because, assuming that Pleasure is not good, then
Pain is neither evil nor good, and so why should he avoid it?

Besides, the life of the good man is not more pleasurable than any other
unless it be granted that his active workings are so too.

XIV

Some inquiry into the bodily Pleasures is also necessary for those who
say that some Pleasures, to be sure, are highly choiceworthy (the good
ones to wit), but not the bodily Pleasures; that is, those which are the
object-matter of the man utterly destitute of Self-Control.

If so, we ask, why are the contrary Pains bad? they cannot be (on their
assumption) because the contrary of bad is good.

May we not say that the necessary bodily Pleasures are good in the sense
in which that which is not-bad is good? or that they are good only up
to a certain point? because such states or movements as cannot have too
much of the better cannot have too much of Pleasure, but those which can
of the former can also of the latter. Now the bodily Pleasures do admit
of excess: in fact the low bad man is such because he pursues the excess
of them instead of those which are necessary (meat, drink, and the
objects of other animal appetites do give pleasure to all, but not in
right manner or degree to all). But his relation to Pain is exactly the
contrary: it is not excessive Pain, but Pain at all, that he avoids
[which makes him to be in this way too a bad low man], because only
in the case of him who pursues excessive Pleasure is Pain contrary to
excessive Pleasure.

It is not enough however merely to state the truth, we should also show
how the false view arises; because this strengthens conviction. I mean,
when we have given a probable reason why that impresses people as true
which really is not true, it gives them a stronger conviction of the
truth. And so we must now explain why the bodily Pleasures appear to
people to be more choiceworthy than any others.

The first obvious reason is, that bodily Pleasure drives out Pain; and
because Pain is felt in excess men pursue Pleasure in excess, _i.e._
generally bodily Pleasure, under the notion of its being a remedy for
that Pain. These remedies, moreover, come to be violent ones; which is
the very reason they are pursued, since the impression they produce
on the mind is owing to their being looked at side by side with their
contrary.

And, as has been said before, there are the two following reasons why
bodily Pleasure is thought to be not-good.

1. Some Pleasures of this class are actings of a low nature, whether
congenital as in brutes, or acquired by custom as in low bad men.

2. Others are in the nature of cures, cures that is of some deficiency;
now of course it is better to have [the healthy state] originally than
that it should accrue afterwards.

[Sidenote: 1154b] But some Pleasures result when natural states are
being perfected: these therefore are good as a matter of result.

Again, the very fact of their being violent causes them to be pursued by
such as can relish no others: such men in fact create violent thirsts
for themselves (if harmless ones then we find no fault, if harmful then
it is bad and low) because they have no other things to take
pleasure in, and the neutral state is distasteful to some people
constitutionally; for toil of some kind is inseparable from life, as
physiologists testify, telling us that the acts of seeing or hearing are
painful, only that we are used to the pain and do not find it out.

Similarly in youth the constant growth produces a state much like
that of vinous intoxication, and youth is pleasant. Again, men of the
melancholic temperament constantly need some remedial process (because
the body, from its temperament, is constantly being worried), and they
are in a chronic state of violent desire. But Pleasure drives out Pain;
not only such Pleasure as is directly contrary to Pain but even any
Pleasure provided it be strong: and this is how men come to be utterly
destitute of Self-Mastery, _i.e._ low and bad.

But those Pleasures which are unconnected with Pains do not admit of
excess: _i.e._ such as belong to objects which are naturally pleasant
and not merely as a matter of result: by the latter class I mean such
as are remedial, and the reason why these are thought to be pleasant is
that the cure results from the action in some way of that part of the
constitution which remains sound. By "pleasant naturally" I mean such as
put into action a nature which is pleasant.

The reason why no one and the same thing is invariably pleasant is that
our nature is, not simple, but complex, involving something different
from itself (so far as we are corruptible beings). Suppose then that one
part of this nature be doing something, this something is, to the other
part, unnatural: but, if there be an equilibrium of the two natures,
then whatever is being done is indifferent. It is obvious that if there
be any whose nature is simple and not complex, to such a being the same
course of acting will always be the most pleasurable.

For this reason it is that the Divinity feels Pleasure which is always
one, _i.e._ simple: not motion merely but also motionlessness acts, and
Pleasure resides rather in the absence than in the presence of motion.

The reason why the Poet's dictum "change is of all things most pleasant"
is true, is "a baseness in our blood;" for as the bad man is easily
changeable, bad must be also the nature that craves change, _i.e._ it is
neither simple nor good.

We have now said our say about Self-Control and its opposite; and about
Pleasure and Pain. What each is, and how the one set is good the other
bad. We have yet to speak of Friendship.




BOOK VIII

[Sidenote: I 1155_a_] Next would seem properly to follow a dissertation
on Friendship: because, in the first place, it is either itself a virtue
or connected with virtue; and next it is a thing most necessary for
life, since no one would choose to live without friends though he should
have all the other good things in the world: and, in fact, men who are
rich or possessed of authority and influence are thought to have special
need of friends: for where is the use of such prosperity if there be
taken away the doing of kindnesses of which friends are the most usual
and most commendable objects? Or how can it be kept or preserved without
friends? because the greater it is so much the more slippery and
hazardous: in poverty moreover and all other adversities men think
friends to be their only refuge.

Furthermore, Friendship helps the young to keep from error: the old, in
respect of attention and such deficiencies in action as their weakness
makes them liable to; and those who are in their prime, in respect of
noble deeds ("They _two_ together going," Homer says, you may remember),
because they are thus more able to devise plans and carry them out.

Again, it seems to be implanted in us by Nature: as, for instance, in
the parent towards the offspring and the offspring towards the parent
(not merely in the human species, but likewise in birds and most
animals), and in those of the same tribe towards one another, and
specially in men of the same nation; for which reason we commend those
men who love their fellows: and one may see in the course of travel how
close of kin and how friendly man is to man.

Furthermore, Friendship seems to be the bond of Social Communities, and
legislators seem to be more anxious to secure it than Justice even. I
mean, Unanimity is somewhat like to Friendship, and this they certainly
aim at and specially drive out faction as being inimical.

Again, where people are in Friendship Justice is not required; but, on
the other hand, though they are just they need Friendship in addition,
and that principle which is most truly just is thought to partake of the
nature of Friendship.

Lastly, not only is it a thing necessary but honourable likewise: since
we praise those who are fond of friends, and the having numerous friends
is thought a matter of credit to a man; some go so far as to hold, that
"good man" and "friend" are terms synonymous.

Yet the disputed points respecting it are not few: some men lay down
that it is a kind of resemblance, and that men who are like one another
are friends: whence come the common sayings, "Like will to like," "Birds
of a feather," and so on. Others, on the contrary, say, that all such
come under the maxim, "Two of a trade never agree."

[Sidenote: 1155b] Again, some men push their inquiries on these points
higher and reason physically: as Euripides, who says,

  "The earth by drought consumed doth love the rain,
  And the great heaven, overcharged with rain,
  Doth love to fall in showers upon the earth."

Heraclitus, again, maintains, that "contrariety is expedient, and that
the best agreement arises from things differing, and that all things
come into being in the way of the principle of antagonism."

Empedocles, among others, in direct opposition to these, affirms, that
"like aims at like."

These physical questions we will take leave to omit, inasmuch as they
are foreign to the present inquiry; and we will examine such as are
proper to man and concern moral characters and feelings: as, for
instance, "Does Friendship arise among all without distinction, or is it
impossible for bad men to be friends?" and, "Is there but one species of
Friendship, or several?" for they who ground the opinion that there is
but one on the fact that Friendship admits of degrees hold that upon
insufficient proof; because things which are different in species admit
likewise of degrees (on this point we have spoken before).


II

Our view will soon be cleared on these points when we have ascertained
what is properly the object-matter of Friendship: for it is thought that
not everything indiscriminately, but some peculiar matter alone, is the
object of this affection; that is to say, what is good, or pleasurable,
or useful. Now it would seem that that is useful through which accrues
any good or pleasure, and so the objects of Friendship, as absolute
Ends, are the good and the pleasurable.

A question here arises; whether it is good absolutely or that which is
good to the individuals, for which men feel Friendship (these two being
sometimes distinct): and similarly in respect of the pleasurable. It
seems then that each individual feels it towards that which is good to
himself, and that abstractedly it is the real good which is the object
of Friendship, and to each individual that which is good to each. It
comes then to this; that each individual feels Friendship not for what
_is_ but for that which _conveys to his mind the impression of being_
good to himself. But this will make no real difference, because that
which is truly the object of Friendship will also convey this impression
to the mind.

There are then three causes from which men feel Friendship: but the term
is not applied to the case of fondness for things inanimate because
there is no requital of the affection nor desire for the good of those
objects: it certainly savours of the ridiculous to say that a man fond
of wine wishes well to it: the only sense in which it is true being that
he wishes it to be kept safe and sound for his own use and benefit. But
to the friend they say one should wish all good for his sake. And when
men do thus wish good to another (he not *[Sidenote: 1156a]
reciprocating the feeling), people call them Kindly; because Friendship
they describe as being "Kindliness between persons who reciprocate it."
But must they not add that the feeling must be mutually known? for many
men are kindly disposed towards those whom they have never seen but whom
they conceive to be amiable or useful: and this notion amounts to the
same thing as a real feeling between them.

Well, these are plainly Kindly-disposed towards one another: but how can
one call them friends while their mutual feelings are unknown to one
another? to complete the idea of Friendship, then, it is requisite that
they have kindly feelings towards one another, and wish one another good
from one of the aforementioned causes, and that these kindly feelings
should be mutually known.

III


As the motives to Friendship differ in kind so do the respective
feelings and Friendships. The species then of Friendship are three, in
number equal to the objects of it, since in the line of each there may
be "mutual affection mutually known."

Now they who have Friendship for one another desire one another's good
according to the motive of their Friendship; accordingly they whose
motive is utility have no Friendship for one another really, but only in
so far as some good arises to them from one another.

And they whose motive is pleasure are in like case: I mean, they have
Friendship for men of easy pleasantry, not because they are of a given
character but because they are pleasant to themselves. So then they
whose motive to Friendship is utility love their friends for what is
good to themselves; they whose motive is pleasure do so for what is
pleasurable to themselves; that is to say, not in so far as the friend
beloved _is_ but in so far as he is useful or pleasurable. These
Friendships then are a matter of result: since the object is not beloved
in that he is the man he is but in that he furnishes advantage or
pleasure as the case may be. Such Friendships are of course very liable
to dissolution if the parties do not continue alike: I mean, that the
others cease to have any Friendship for them when they are no longer
pleasurable or useful. Now it is the nature of utility not to be
permanent but constantly varying: so, of course, when the motive which
made them friends is vanished, the Friendship likewise dissolves; since
it existed only relatively to those circumstances.

Friendship of this kind is thought to exist principally among the old
(because men at that time of life pursue not what is pleasurable but
what is profitable); and in such, of men in their prime and of the
young, as are given to the pursuit of profit. They that are such have no
intimate intercourse with one another; for sometimes they are not
even pleasurable to one another; nor, in fact, do they desire such
intercourse unless their friends are profitable to them, because they
are pleasurable only in so far as they have hopes of advantage. With
these Friendships is commonly ranked that of hospitality.

But the Friendship of the young is thought to be based on the motive
of pleasure: because they live at the beck and call of passion and
generally pursue what is pleasurable to themselves and the object of the
present moment: and as their age changes so likewise do their pleasures.

This is the reason why they form and dissolve Friendships rapidly: since
the Friendship changes with the pleasurable object and such pleasure
changes quickly.

[Sidenote: 1156b] The young are also much given up to Love; this passion
being, in great measure, a matter of impulse and based on pleasure: for
which cause they conceive Friendships and quickly drop them, changing
often in the same day: but these wish for society and intimate
intercourse with their friends, since they thus attain the object of
their Friendship.

That then is perfect Friendship which subsists between those who are
good and whose similarity consists in their goodness: for these men wish
one another's good in similar ways; in so far as they are good (and good
they are in themselves); and those are specially friends who wish good
to their friends for their sakes, because they feel thus towards them on
their own account and not as a mere matter of result; so the Friendship
between these men continues to subsist so long as they are good; and
goodness, we know, has in it a principle of permanence.

Moreover, each party is good abstractedly and also relatively to his
friend, for all good men are not only abstractedly good but also useful
to one another. Such friends are also mutually pleasurable because
all good men are so abstractedly, and also relatively to one another,
inasmuch as to each individual those actions are pleasurable which
correspond to his nature, and all such as are like them. Now when men
are good these will be always the same, or at least similar.

Friendship then under these circumstances is permanent, as we should
reasonably expect, since it combines in itself all the requisite
qualifications of friends. I mean, that Friendship of whatever kind is
based upon good or pleasure (either abstractedly or relatively to the
person entertaining the sentiment of Friendship), and results from a
similarity of some sort; and to this kind belong all the aforementioned
requisites in the parties themselves, because in this the parties are
similar, and so on: moreover, in it there is the abstractedly good and
the abstractedly pleasant, and as these are specially the object-matter
of Friendship so the feeling and the state of Friendship is found most
intense and most excellent in men thus qualified.

Rare it is probable Friendships of this kind will be, because men
of this kind are rare. Besides, all requisite qualifications being
presupposed, there is further required time and intimacy: for, as the
proverb says, men cannot know one another "till they have eaten the
requisite quantity of salt together;" nor can they in fact admit one
another to intimacy, much less be friends, till each has appeared to
the other and been proved to be a fit object of Friendship. They who
speedily commence an interchange of friendly actions may be said to wish
to be friends, but they are not so unless they are also proper objects
of Friendship and mutually known to be such: that is to say, a desire
for Friendship may arise quickly but not Friendship itself.


IV

Well, this Friendship is perfect both in respect of the time and in all
other points; and exactly the same and similar results accrue to each
party from the other; which ought to be the case between friends.

[Sidenote: II57a] The friendship based upon the pleasurable is, so to
say, a copy of this, since the good are sources of pleasure to one
another: and that based on utility likewise, the good being also
useful to one another. Between men thus connected Friendships are
most permanent when the same result accrues to both from one another,
pleasure, for instance; and not merely so but from the same source, as
in the case of two men of easy pleasantry; and not as it is in that of a
lover and the object of his affection, these not deriving their pleasure
from the same causes, but the former from seeing the latter and the
latter from receiving the attentions of the former: and when the bloom
of youth fades the Friendship sometimes ceases also, because then the
lover derives no pleasure from seeing and the object of his affection
ceases to receive the attentions which were paid before: in many cases,
however, people so connected continue friends, if being of similar
tempers they have come from custom to like one another's disposition.

Where people do not interchange pleasure but profit in matters of Love,
the Friendship is both less intense in degree and also less permanent:
in fact, they who are friends because of advantage commonly part when
the advantage ceases; for, in reality, they never were friends of one
another but of the advantage.

So then it appears that from motives of pleasure or profit bad men may
be friends to one another, or good men to bad men or men of neutral
character to one of any character whatever: but disinterestedly, for the
sake of one another, plainly the good alone can be friends; because
bad men have no pleasure even in themselves unless in so far as some
advantage arises.

And further, the Friendship of the good is alone superior to calumny;
it not being easy for men to believe a third person respecting one
whom they have long tried and proved: there is between good men mutual
confidence, and the feeling that one's friend would never have done one
wrong, and all other such things as are expected in Friendship really
worthy the name; but in the other kinds there is nothing to prevent all
such suspicions.

I call them Friendships, because since men commonly give the name of
friends to those who are connected from motives of profit (which is
justified by political language, for alliances between states are
thought to be contracted with a view to advantage), and to those who are
attached to one another by the motive of pleasure (as children are), we
may perhaps also be allowed to call such persons friends, and say there
are several species of Friendship; primarily and specially that of
the good, in that they are good, and the rest only in the way of
resemblance: I mean, people connected otherwise are friends in that way
in which there arises to them somewhat good and some mutual resemblance
(because, we must remember the pleasurable is good to those who are fond
of it).

These secondary Friendships, however, do not combine very well; that is
to say, the same persons do not become friends by reason of advantage
and by reason of the pleasurable, for these matters of result are not
often combined. And Friendship having been divided into these kinds, bad
[Sidenote: _1157b_] men will be friends by reason of pleasure or profit,
this being their point of resemblance; while the good are friends for
one another's sake, that is, in so far as they are good.

These last may be termed abstractedly and simply friends, the former as
a matter of result and termed friends from their resemblance to these
last.


V

Further; just as in respect of the different virtues some men are termed
good in respect of a certain inward state, others in respect of acts
of working, so is it in respect of Friendship: I mean, they who live
together take pleasure in, and impart good to, one another: but they who
are asleep or are locally separated do not perform acts, but only are in
such a state as to act in a friendly way if they acted at all: distance
has in itself no direct effect upon Friendship, but only prevents the
acting it out: yet, if the absence be protracted, it is thought to cause
a forgetfulness even of the Friendship: and hence it has been said,
"many and many a Friendship doth want of intercourse destroy."

Accordingly, neither the old nor the morose appear to be calculated for
Friendship, because the pleasurableness in them is small, and no one can
spend his days in company with that which is positively painful or even
not pleasurable; since to avoid the painful and aim at the pleasurable
is one of the most obvious tendencies of human nature. They who get on
with one another very fairly, but are not in habits of intimacy, are
rather like people having kindly feelings towards one another than
friends; nothing being so characteristic of friends as the living with
one another, because the necessitous desire assistance, and the happy
companionship, they being the last persons in the world for solitary
existence: but people cannot spend their time together unless they are
mutually pleasurable and take pleasure in the same objects, a quality
which is thought to appertain to the Friendship of companionship.

The connection then subsisting between the good is Friendship _par
excellence_, as has already been frequently said: since that which is
abstractedly good or pleasant is thought to be an object of Friendship
and choiceworthy, and to each individual whatever is such to him;
and the good man to the good man for both these reasons. (Now the
entertaining the sentiment is like a feeling, but Friendship itself
like a state: because the former may have for its object even things
inanimate, but requital of Friendship is attended with moral choice
which proceeds from a moral state: and again, men wish good to the
objects of their Friendship for their sakes, not in the way of a mere
feeling but of moral state.).

And the good, in loving their friend, love their own good (inasmuch as
the good man, when brought into that relation, becomes a good to him
with whom he is so connected), so that either party loves his own
good, and repays his friend equally both in wishing well and in the
pleasurable: for equality is said to be a tie of Friendship. Well, these
points belong most to the Friendship between good men.

But between morose or elderly men Friendship is less apt to arise,
because they are somewhat awkward-tempered, and take less pleasure in
intercourse and society; these being thought to be specially friendly
and productive of Friendship: and so young men become friends quickly,
old men not so (because people do not become friends with any, unless
they take pleasure in them); and in like manner neither do the morose.
Yet men of these classes entertain kindly feelings towards one another:
they wish good to one another and render mutual assistance in respect of
their needs, but they are not quite friends, because they neither
spend their time together nor take pleasure in one another, which
circumstances are thought specially to belong to Friendship.

To be a friend to many people, in the way of the perfect Friendship, is
not possible; just as you cannot be in love with many at once: it is,
so to speak, a state of excess which naturally has but one object; and
besides, it is not an easy thing for one man to be very much pleased
with many people at the same time, nor perhaps to find many really good.
Again, a man needs experience, and to be in habits of close intimacy,
which is very difficult.

But it _is_ possible to please many on the score of advantage and
pleasure: because there are many men of the kind, and the services may
be rendered in a very short time.

Of the two imperfect kinds that which most resembles the perfect is the
Friendship based upon pleasure, in which the same results accrue from
both and they take pleasure in one another or in the same objects; such
as are the Friendships of the young, because a generous spirit is most
found in these. The Friendship because of advantage is the connecting
link of shopkeepers.

Then again, the very happy have no need of persons who are profitable,
but of pleasant ones they have because they wish to have people to live
intimately with; and what is painful they bear for a short time indeed,
but continuously no one could support it, nay, not even the Chief Good
itself, if it were painful to him individually: and so they look out for
pleasant friends: perhaps they ought to require such to be good also;
and good moreover to themselves individually, because then they will
have all the proper requisites of Friendship.

Men in power are often seen to make use of several distinct friends:
for some are useful to them and others pleasurable, but the two are not
often united: because they do not, in fact, seek such as shall combine
pleasantness and goodness, nor such as shall be useful for honourable
purposes: but with a view to attain what is pleasant they look out for
men of easy-pleasantry; and again, for men who are clever at executing
any business put into their hands: and these qualifications are not
commonly found united in the same man.

It has been already stated that the good man unites the qualities of
pleasantness and usefulness: but then such a one will not be a friend to
a superior unless he be also his superior in goodness: for if this be
not the case, he cannot, being surpassed in one point, make things
equal by a proportionate degree of Friendship. And characters who unite
superiority of station and goodness are not common. Now all the kinds
of Friendship which have been already mentioned exist in a state of
equality, inasmuch as either the same results accrue to both and they
wish the same things to one another, or else they barter one thing
against another; pleasure, for instance, against profit: it has been
said already that Friendships of this latter kind are less intense in
degree and less permanent.

And it is their resemblance or dissimilarity to the same thing which
makes them to be thought to be and not to be Friendships: they show like
Friendships in right of their likeness to that which is based on virtue
(the one kind having the pleasurable, the other the profitable, both
of which belong also to the other); and again, they do not show like
Friendships by reason of their unlikeness to that true kind; which
unlikeness consists herein, that while that is above calumny and so
permanent these quickly change and differ in many other points.


VII

But there is another form of Friendship, that, namely, in which the one
party is superior to the other; as between father and son, elder and
younger, husband and wife, ruler and ruled. These also differ one from
another: I mean, the Friendship between parents and children is not the
same as between ruler and the ruled, nor has the father the same towards
the son as the son towards the father, nor the husband towards the wife
as she towards him; because the work, and therefore the excellence, of
each of these is different, and different therefore are the causes of
their feeling Friendship; distinct and different therefore are their
feelings and states of Friendship.

And the same results do not accrue to each from the other, nor in fact
ought they to be looked for: but, when children render to their parents
what they ought to the authors of their being, and parents to their sons
what they ought to their offspring, the Friendship between such parties
will be permanent and equitable.

Further; the feeling of Friendship should be in a due proportion in all
Friendships which are between superior and inferior; I mean, the better
man, or the more profitable, and so forth, should be the object of a
stronger feeling than he himself entertains, because when the feeling of
Friendship comes to be after a certain rate then equality in a certain
sense is produced, which is thought to be a requisite in Friendship.

(It must be remembered, however, that the equal is not in the same case
as regards Justice and Friendship: for in strict Justice the exactly
proportioned equal ranks first, and the actual numerically equal ranks
second, while in Friendship this is exactly reversed.)

[Sidenote: 1159a] And that equality is thus requisite is plainly shown
by the occurrence of a great difference of goodness or badness, or
prosperity, or something else: for in this case, people are not any
longer friends, nay they do not even feel that they ought to be. The
clearest illustration is perhaps the case of the gods, because they are
most superior in all good things. It is obvious too, in the case of
kings, for they who are greatly their inferiors do not feel entitled to
be friends to them; nor do people very insignificant to be friends to
those of very high excellence or wisdom. Of course, in such cases it
is out of the question to attempt to define up to what point they may
continue friends: for you may remove many points of agreement and the
Friendship last nevertheless; but when one of the parties is very far
separated (as a god from men), it cannot continue any longer.

This has given room for a doubt, whether friends do really wish to their
friends the very highest goods, as that they may be gods: because, in
case the wish were accomplished, they would no longer have them for
friends, nor in fact would they have the good things they had, because
friends are good things. If then it has been rightly said that a friend
wishes to his friend good things for that friend's sake, it must be
understood that he is to remain such as he now is: that is to say, he
will wish the greatest good to him of which as man he is capable: yet
perhaps not all, because each man desires good for himself most of all.

VIII

It is thought that desire for honour makes the mass of men wish rather
to be the objects of the feeling of Friendship than to entertain it
themselves (and for this reason they are fond of flatterers, a flatterer
being a friend inferior or at least pretending to be such and rather to
entertain towards another the feeling of Friendship than to be himself
the object of it), since the former is thought to be nearly the same as
being honoured, which the mass of men desire. And yet men seem to choose
honour, not for its own sake, but incidentally: I mean, the common run
of men delight to be honoured by those in power because of the hope it
raises; that is they think they shall get from them anything they may
happen to be in want of, so they delight in honour as an earnest of
future benefit. They again who grasp at honour at the hands of the good
and those who are really acquainted with their merits desire to confirm
their own opinion about themselves: so they take pleasure in the
conviction that they are good, which is based on the sentence of those
who assert it. But in being the objects of Friendship men delight for
its own sake, and so this may be judged to be higher than being honoured
and Friendship to be in itself choiceworthy. Friendship, moreover, is
thought to consist in feeling, rather than being the object of, the
sentiment of Friendship, which is proved by the delight mothers have in
the feeling: some there are who give their children to be adopted and
brought up by others, and knowing them bear this feeling towards them
never seeking to have it returned, if both are not possible; but seeming
to be content with seeing them well off and bearing this feeling
themselves towards them, even though they, by reason of ignorance, never
render to them any filial regard or love.

Since then Friendship stands rather in the entertaining, than in being
the object of, the sentiment, and they are praised who are fond of their
friends, it seems that entertaining--*[Sidenote: II59b]the sentiment is
the Excellence of friends; and so, in whomsoever this exists in due
proportion these are stable friends and their Friendship is permanent.
And in this way may they who are unequal best be friends, because they
may thus be made equal.

Equality, then, and similarity are a tie to Friendship, and specially
the similarity of goodness, because good men, being stable in
themselves, are also stable as regards others, and neither ask degrading
services nor render them, but, so to say, rather prevent them: for it is
the part of the good neither to do wrong themselves nor to allow their
friends in so doing.

The bad, on the contrary, have no principle of stability: in fact, they
do not even continue like themselves: only they come to be friends for
a short time from taking delight in one another's wickedness. Those
connected by motives of profit, or pleasure, hold together somewhat
longer: so long, that is to say, as they can give pleasure or profit
mutually.

The Friendship based on motives of profit is thought to be most of all
formed out of contrary elements: the poor man, for instance, is thus a
friend of the rich, and the ignorant of the man of information; that
is to say, a man desiring that of which he is, as it happens, in want,
gives something else in exchange for it. To this same class we may refer
the lover and beloved, the beautiful and the ill-favoured. For this
reason lovers sometimes show in a ridiculous light by claiming to be the
objects of as intense a feeling as they themselves entertain: of course
if they are equally fit objects of Friendship they are perhaps entitled
to claim this, but if they have nothing of the kind it is ridiculous.

Perhaps, moreover, the contrary does not aim at its contrary for its own
sake but incidentally: the mean is really what is grasped at; it being
good for the dry, for instance, not to become wet but to attain the
mean, and so of the hot, etc. However, let us drop these questions,
because they are in fact somewhat foreign to our purpose.

IX

It seems too, as was stated at the commencement, that Friendship and
Justice have the same object-matter, and subsist between the same
persons: I mean that in every Communion there is thought to be some
principle of Justice and also some Friendship: men address as friends,
for instance, those who are their comrades by sea, or in war, and in
like manner also those who are brought into Communion with them in other
ways: and the Friendship, because also the Justice, is co-extensive with
the Communion, This justifies the common proverb, "the goods of friends
are common," since Friendship rests upon Communion.

[1160a] Now brothers and intimate companions have all in common, but
other people have their property separate, and some have more in common
and others less, because the Friendships likewise differ in degree. So
too do the various principles of Justice involved, not being the same
between parents and children as between brothers, nor between companions
as between fellow-citizens merely, and so on of all the other
conceivable Friendships. Different also are the principles of Injustice
as regards these different grades, and the acts become intensified by
being done to friends; for instance, it is worse to rob your companion
than one who is merely a fellow-citizen; to refuse help to a brother
than to a stranger; and to strike your father than any one else. So then
the Justice naturally increases with the degree of Friendship, as being
between the same parties and of equal extent.

All cases of Communion are parts, so to say, of the great Social one,
since in them men associate with a view to some advantage and to procure
some of those things which are needful for life; and the great Social
Communion is thought originally to have been associated and to
continue for the sake of some advantage: this being the point at which
legislators aim, affirming that to be just which is generally expedient.
All the other cases of Communion aim at advantage in particular points;
the crew of a vessel at that which is to result from the voyage which is
undertaken with a view to making money, or some such object; comrades in
war at that which is to result from the war, grasping either at wealth
or victory, or it may be a political position; and those of the same
tribe, or Demus, in like manner.

Some of them are thought to be formed for pleasure's sake, those, for
instance, of bacchanals or club-fellows, which are with a view to
Sacrifice or merely company. But all these seem to be ranged under
the great Social one, inasmuch as the aim of this is, not merely the
expediency of the moment but, for life and at all times; with a view
to which the members of it institute sacrifices and their attendant
assemblies, to render honour to the gods and procure for themselves
respite from toil combined with pleasure. For it appears that
sacrifices and religious assemblies in old times were made as a kind of
first-fruits after the ingathering of the crops, because at such seasons
they had most leisure.

So then it appears that all the instances of Communion are parts of the
great Social one: and corresponding Friendships will follow upon such
Communions.


X

Of Political Constitutions there are three kinds; and equal in number
are the deflections from them, being, so to say, corruptions of them.

The former are Kingship, Aristocracy, and that which recognises the
principle of wealth, which it seems appropriate to call Timocracy (I
give to it the name of a political constitution because people commonly
do so). Of these the best is Monarchy, and Timocracy the worst.

[Sidenote: II6ob] From Monarchy the deflection is Despotism; both being
Monarchies but widely differing from each other; for the Despot looks to
his own advantage, but the King to that of his subjects: for he is in
fact no King who is not thoroughly independent and superior to the rest
in all good things, and he that is this has no further wants: he will
not then have to look to his own advantage but to that of his subjects,
for he that is not in such a position is a mere King elected by lot for
the nonce.

But Despotism is on a contrary footing to this Kingship, because the
Despot pursues his own good: and in the case of this its inferiority
is most evident, and what is worse is contrary to what is best. The
Transition to Despotism is made from Kingship, Despotism being a corrupt
form of Monarchy, that is to say, the bad King comes to be a Despot.

From Aristocracy to Oligarchy the transition is made by the fault of the
Rulers in distributing the public property contrary to right proportion;
and giving either all that is good, or the greatest share, to
themselves; and the offices to the same persons always, making wealth
their idol; thus a few bear rule and they bad men in the place of the
best.

From Timocracy the transition is to Democracy, they being contiguous:
for it is the nature of Timocracy to be in the hands of a multitude,
and all in the same grade of property are equal. Democracy is the least
vicious of all, since herein the form of the constitution undergoes
least change.

Well, these are generally the changes to which the various Constitutions
are liable, being the least in degree and the easiest to make.

Likenesses, and, as it were, models of them, one may find even in
Domestic life: for instance, the Communion between a Father and his Sons
presents the figure of Kingship, because the children are the Father's
care: and hence Homer names Jupiter Father because Kingship is intended
to be a paternal rule. Among the Persians, however, the Father's rule is
Despotic, for they treat their Sons as slaves. (The relation of Master
to Slaves is of the nature of Despotism because the point regarded
herein is the Master's interest): this now strikes me to be as it ought,
but the Persian custom to be mistaken; because for different persons
there should be different rules. [Sidenote: 1161a] Between Husband and
Wife the relation takes the form of Aristocracy, because he rules by
right and in such points only as the Husband should, and gives to
the Wife all that befits her to have. Where the Husband lords it in
everything he changes the relation into an Oligarchy; because he does
it contrary to right and not as being the better of the two. In some
instances the Wives take the reins of government, being heiresses: here
the rule is carried on not in right of goodness but by reason of wealth
and power, as it is in Oligarchies.

Timocracy finds its type in the relation of Brothers: they being equal
except as to such differences as age introduces: for which reason, if
they are very different in age, the Friendship comes to be no longer
a fraternal one: while Democracy is represented specially by families
which have no head (all being there equal), or in which the proper head
is weak and so every member does that which is right in his own eyes.


XI

Attendant then on each form of Political Constitution there plainly is
Friendship exactly co-extensive with the principle of Justice; that
between a King and his Subjects being in the relation of a superiority
of benefit, inasmuch as he benefits his subjects; it being assumed that
he is a good king and takes care of their welfare as a shepherd tends
his flock; whence Homer (to quote him again) calls Agamemnon, "shepherd
of the people." And of this same kind is the Paternal Friendship, only
that it exceeds the former in the greatness of the benefits done;
because the father is the author of being (which is esteemed the
greatest benefit) and of maintenance and education (these things are
also, by the way, ascribed to ancestors generally): and by the law of
nature the father has the right of rule over his sons, ancestors over
their descendants, and the king over his subjects.

These friendships are also between superiors and inferiors, for which
reason parents are not merely loved but also honoured. The principle of
Justice also between these parties is not exactly the same but according
to proportiton, because so also is the Friendship.

Now between Husband and Wife there is the same Friendship as in
Aristocracy: for the relation is determined by relative excellence, and
the better person has the greater good and each has what befits: so too
also is the principle of Justice between them.

The Fraternal Friendship is like that of Companions, because brothers
are equal and much of an age, and such persons have generally like
feelings and like dispositions. Like to this also is the Friendship of a
Timocracy, because the citizens are intended to be equal and equitable:
rule, therefore, passes from hand to hand, and is distributed on equal
terms: so too is the Friendship accordingly.

[Sidenote: 1161b] In the deflections from the constitutional forms, just
as the principle of Justice is but small so is the Friendship also: and
least of all in the most perverted form: in Despotism there is little
or no Friendship. For generally wherever the ruler and the ruled have
nothing in common there is no Friendship because there is no Justice;
but the case is as between an artisan and his tool, or between soul and
body, and master and slave; all these are benefited by those who use
them, but towards things inanimate there is neither Friendship nor
Justice: nor even towards a horse or an ox, or a slave _qu\E2_ slave,
because there is nothing in common: a slave as such is an animate tool,
a tool an inanimate slave. _Qu\E2_ slave, then, there is no Friendship
towards him, only _qu\E2_ man: for it is thought that there is some
principle of Justice between every man, and every other who can share in
law and be a party to an agreement; and so somewhat of Friendship, in so
far as he is man. So in Despotisms the Friendships and the principle of
Justice are inconsiderable in extent, but in Democracies they are most
considerable because they who are equal have much in common.

XII


Now of course all Friendship is based upon Communion, as has been
already stated: but one would be inclined to separate off from the rest
the Friendship of Kindred, and that of Companions: whereas those of men
of the same city, or tribe, or crew, and all such, are more peculiarly,
it would seem, based upon Communion, inasmuch as they plainly exist in
right of some agreement expressed or implied: among these one may rank
also the Friendship of Hospitality,

The Friendship of Kindred is likewise of many kinds, and appears in all
its varieties to depend on the Parental: parents, I mean, love their
children as being a part of themselves, children love their parents as
being themselves somewhat derived from them. But parents know their
offspring more than these know that they are from the parents, and the
source is more closely bound to that which is produced than that which
is produced is to that which formed it: of course, whatever is derived
from one's self is proper to that from which it is so derived (as, for
instance, a tooth or a hair, or any other thing whatever to him that
has it): but the source to it is in no degree proper, or in an inferior
degree at least.

Then again the greater length of time comes in: the parents love their
offspring from the first moment of their being, but their offspring
them only after a lapse of time when they have attained intelligence
or instinct. These considerations serve also to show why mothers have
greater strength of affection than fathers.

Now parents love their children as themselves (since what is derived
from themselves becomes a kind of other Self by the fact of separation),
but children their parents as being sprung from them. And brothers love
one another from being sprung from the same; that is, their sameness
with the common stock creates a sameness with one another; whence come
the phrases, "same blood," "root," and so on. In fact they are the same,
in a sense, even in the separate distinct individuals.

Then again the being brought up together, and the nearness of age, are
a great help towards Friendship, for a man likes one of his own age and
persons who are used to one another are companions, which accounts
for the resemblance between the Friendship of Brothers and that of
Companions.

[Sidenote:1162a] And cousins and all other relatives derive their bond
of union from these, that is to say, from their community of origin: and
the strength of this bond varies according to their respective distances
from the common ancestor.

Further: the Friendship felt by children towards parents, and by men
towards the gods, is as towards something good and above them; because
these have conferred the greatest possible benefits, in that they are
the causes of their being and being nourished, and of their having been
educated after they were brought into being.

And Friendship of this kind has also the pleasurable and the profitable
more than that between persons unconnected by blood, in proportion as
their life is also more shared in common. Then again in the Fraternal
Friendship there is all that there is in that of Companions, and more in
the good, and generally in those who are alike; in proportion as they
are more closely tied and from their very birth have a feeling of
affection for one another to begin with, and as they are more like in
disposition who spring from the same stock and have grown up together
and been educated alike: and besides this they have the greatest
opportunities in respect of time for proving one another, and can
therefore depend most securely upon the trial. The elements
of Friendship between other consanguinities will be of course
proportionably similar.

Between Husband and Wife there is thought to be Friendship by a law of
nature: man being by nature disposed to pair, more than to associate in
Communities: in proportion as the family is prior in order of time and
more absolutely necessary than the Community. And procreation is more
common to him with other animals; all the other animals have Communion
thus far, but human creatures cohabit not merely for the sake of
procreation but also with a view to life in general: because in this
connection the works are immediately divided, and some belong to the
man, others to the woman: thus they help one the other, putting what is
peculiar to each into the common stock.

And for these reasons this Friendship is thought to combine the
profitable and the pleasurable: it will be also based upon virtue if
they are good people; because each has goodness and they may take
delight in this quality in each other. Children too are thought to be a
tie: accordingly the childless sooner separate, for the children are a
good common to both and anything in common is a bond of union.

The question how a man is to live with his wife, or (more generally) one
friend with another, appears to be no other than this, how it is just
that they should: because plainly there is not the same principle
of Justice between a friend and friend, as between strangers, or
companions, or mere chance fellow-travellers.

XIII

[Sidenote:1162b] There are then, as was stated at the commencement of
this book, three kinds of Friendship, and in each there may be friends
on a footing of equality and friends in the relation of superior and
inferior; we find, I mean, that people who are alike in goodness, become
friends, and better with worse, and so also pleasant people; again,
because of advantage people are friends, either balancing exactly their
mutual profitableness or differing from one another herein. Well then,
those who are equal should in right of this equality be equalised also
by the degree of their Friendship and the other points, and those who
are on a footing of inequality by rendering Friendship in proportion to
the superiority of the other party.

Fault-finding and blame arises, either solely or most naturally, in
Friendship of which utility is the motive: for they who are friends by
reason of goodness, are eager to do kindnesses to one another because
this is a natural result of goodness and Friendship; and when men are
vying with each other for this End there can be no fault-finding nor
contention: since no one is annoyed at one who entertains for him the
sentiment of Friendship and does kindnesses to him, but if of a refined
mind he requites him with kind actions. And suppose that one of the two
exceeds the other, yet as he is attaining his object he will not find
fault with his friend, for good is the object of each party.

Neither can there well be quarrels between men who are friends for
pleasure's sake: because supposing them to delight in living together
then both attain their desire; or if not a man would be put in a
ridiculous light who should find fault with another for not pleasing
him, since it is in his power to forbear intercourse with him. But
the Friendship because of advantage is very liable to fault-finding;
because, as the parties use one another with a view to advantage, the
requirements are continually enlarging, and they think they have less
than of right belongs to them, and find fault because though justly
entitled they do not get as much as they want: while they who do the
kindnesses, can never come up to the requirements of those to whom they
are being done.

It seems also, that as the Just is of two kinds, the unwritten and the
legal, so Friendship because of advantage is of two kinds, what may
be called the Moral, and the Legal: and the most fruitful source of
complaints is that parties contract obligations and discharge them not
in the same line of Friendship. The Legal is upon specified conditions,
either purely tradesmanlike from hand to hand or somewhat more
gentlemanly as regards time but still by agreement a _quid pro quo_.

In this Legal kind the obligation is clear and admits of no dispute, the
friendly element is the delay in requiring its discharge: and for this
reason in some countries no actions can be maintained at Law for the
recovery of such debts, it being held that they who have dealt on the
footing of credit must be content to abide the issue.

That which may be termed the Moral kind is not upon specified
conditions, but a man gives as to his friend and so on: but still he
expects to receive an equivalent, or even more, as though he had not
given but lent: he also will find fault, because he does not get the
obligation discharged in the same way as it was contracted.

[Sidenote:1163a] Now this results from the fact, that all men, or the
generality at least, _wish_ what is honourable, but, when tested,
_choose_ what is profitable; and the doing kindnesses disinterestedly
is honourable while receiving benefits is profitable. In such cases one
should, if able, make a return proportionate to the good received, and
do so willingly, because one ought not to make a disinterested friend of
a man against his inclination: one should act, I say, as having made a
mistake originally in receiving kindness from one from whom one ought
not to have received it, he being not a friend nor doing the act
disinterestedly; one should therefore discharge one's self of the
obligation as having received a kindness on specified terms: and if able
a man would engage to repay the kindness, while if he were unable even
the doer of it would not expect it of him: so that if he is able he
ought to repay it. But one ought at the first to ascertain from whom
one is receiving kindness, and on what understanding, that on that same
understanding one may accept it or not.

A question admitting of dispute is whether one is to measure a kindness
by the good done to the receiver of it, and make this the standard by
which to requite, or by the kind intention of the doer?

For they who have received kindnesses frequently plead in depreciation
that they have received from their benefactors such things as were small
for them to give, or such as they themselves could have got from others:
while the doers of the kindnesses affirm that they gave the best they
had, and what could not have been got from others, and under danger, or
in such-like straits.

May we not say, that as utility is the motive of the Friendship the
advantage conferred on the receiver must be the standard? because he it
is who requests the kindness and the other serves him in his need on the
understanding that he is to get an equivalent: the assistance rendered
is then exactly proportionate to the advantage which the receiver has
obtained, and he should therefore repay as much as he gained by it, or
even more, this being more creditable.

In Friendships based on goodness, the question, of course, is never
raised, but herein the motive of the doer seems to be the proper
standard, since virtue and moral character depend principally on motive.


XIV

Quarrels arise also in those Friendships in which the parties are
unequal because each party thinks himself entitled to the greater share,
and of course, when this happens, the Friendship is broken up.

The man who is better than the other thinks that having the greater
share pertains to him of right, for that more is always awarded to the
good man: and similarly the man who is more profitable to another than
that other to him: "one who is useless," they say, "ought not to share
equally, for it comes to a tax, and not a Friendship, unless the fruits
of the Friendship are reaped in proportion to the works done:" their
notion being, that as in a money partnership they who contribute more
receive more so should it be in Friendship likewise.

On the other hand, the needy man and the less virtuous advance the
opposite claim: they urge that "it is the very business of a good friend
to help those who are in need, else what is the use of having a good or
powerful friend if one is not to reap the advantage at all?"

[Sidenote: 1163b] Now each seems to advance a right claim and to be
entitled to get more out of the connection than the other, only _not
more of the same thing_: but the superior man should receive more
respect, the needy man more profit: respect being the reward of goodness
and beneficence, profit being the aid of need.

This is plainly the principle acted upon in Political Communities:
he receives no honour who gives no good to the common stock: for the
property of the Public is given to him who does good to the Public, and
honour is the property of the Public; it is not possible both to make
money out of the Public and receive honour likewise; because no one will
put up with the less in every respect: so to him who suffers loss as
regards money they award honour, but money to him who can be paid by
gifts: since, as has been stated before, the observing due proportion
equalises and preserves Friendship.

Like rules then should be observed in the intercourse of friends who
are unequal; and to him who advantages another in respect of money, or
goodness, that other should repay honour, making requital according to
his power; because Friendship requires what is possible, not what is
strictly due, this being not possible in all cases, as in the honours
paid to the gods and to parents: no man could ever make the due return
in these cases, and so he is thought to be a good man who pays respect
according to his ability.

For this reason it may be judged never to be allowable for a son to
disown his father, whereas a father may his son: because he that owes
is bound to pay; now a son can never, by anything he has done, fully
requite the benefits first conferred on him by his father, and so is
always a debtor. But they to whom anything is owed may cast off their
debtors: therefore the father may his son. But at the same time it must
perhaps be admitted, that it seems no father ever _would_ sever himself
utterly from a son, except in a case of exceeding depravity: because,
independently of the natural Friendship, it is like human nature not to
put away from one's self the assistance which a son might render. But to
the son, if depraved, assisting his father is a thing to be avoided, or
at least one which he will not be very anxious to do; most men
being willing enough to receive kindness, but averse to doing it as
unprofitable.

Let thus much suffice on these points.




BOOK IX


I

[Sidenote: 1164a] Well, in all the Friendships the parties to which are
dissimilar it is the proportionate which equalises and preserves the
Friendship, as has been already stated: I mean, in the Social Friendship
the cobbler, for instance, gets an equivalent for his shoes after a
certain rate; and the weaver, and all others in like manner. Now in
this case a common measure has been provided in money, and to this
accordingly all things are referred and by this are measured: but in
the Friendship of Love the complaint is sometimes from the lover that,
though he loves exceedingly, his love is not requited; he having perhaps
all the time nothing that can be the object of Friendship: again,
oftentimes from the object of love that he who as a suitor promised any
and every thing now performs nothing. These cases occur because the
Friendship of the lover for the beloved object is based upon pleasure,
that of the other for him upon utility, and in one of the parties the
requisite quality is not found: for, as these are respectively the
grounds of the Friendship, the Friendship comes to be broken up because
the motives to it cease to exist: the parties loved not one another but
qualities in one another which are not permanent, and so neither are the
Friendships: whereas the Friendship based upon the moral character of
the parties, being independent and disinterested, is permanent, as we
have already stated.

Quarrels arise also when the parties realise different results and not
those which they desire; for the not attaining one's special object is
all one, in this case, with getting nothing at all: as in the well-known
case where a man made promises to a musician, rising in proportion to
the excellence of his music; but when, the next morning, the musician
claimed the performance of his promises, he said that he had given him
pleasure for pleasure: of course, if each party had intended this, it
would have been all right: but if the one desires amusement and the
other gain, and the one gets his object but the other not, the dealing
cannot be fair: because a man fixes his mind upon what he happens to
want, and will give so and so for that specific thing.

The question then arises, who is to fix the rate? the man who first
gives, or the man who first takes? because, _prima facie_, the man who
first gives seems to leave the rate to be fixed by the other party.
This, they say, was in fact the practice of Protagoras: when he taught
a man anything he would bid the learner estimate the worth of the
knowledge gained by his own private opinion; and then he used to take so
much from him. In such cases some people adopt the rule,

  "With specified reward a friend should be content."

They are certainly fairly found fault with who take the money in advance
and then do nothing of what they said they would do, their promises
having been so far beyond their ability; for such men do not perform
what they agreed, The Sophists, however, are perhaps obliged to take
this course, because no one would give a sixpence for their knowledge.
These then, I say, are fairly found fault with, because they do not what
they have already taken money for doing.

[Sidenote: 1164b] In cases where no stipulation as to the respective
services is made they who disinterestedly do the first service will not
raise the question (as we have said before), because it is the nature of
Friendship, based on mutual goodness to be reference to the intention of
the other, the intention being characteristic of the true friend and of
goodness.

And it would seem the same rule should be laid down for those who are
connected with one another as teachers and learners of philosophy; for
here the value of the commodity cannot be measured by money, and, in
fact, an exactly equivalent price cannot be set upon it, but perhaps it
is sufficient to do what one can, as in the case of the gods or one's
parents.

But where the original giving is not upon these terms but avowedly for
some return, the most proper course is perhaps for the requital to be
such as _both_ shall allow to be proportionate, and, where this cannot
be, then for the receiver to fix the value would seem to be not only
necessary but also fair: because when the first giver gets that which is
equivalent to the advantage received by the other, or to what he would
have given to secure the pleasure he has had, then he has the value from
him: for not only is this seen to be the course adopted in matters of
buying and selling but also in some places the law does not allow of
actions upon voluntary dealings; on the principle that when one man has
trusted another he must be content to have the obligation discharged in
the same spirit as he originally contracted it: that is to say, it is
thought fairer for the trusted, than for the trusting, party, to fix the
value. For, in general, those who have and those who wish to get things
do not set the same value on them: what is their own, and what they give
in each case, appears to them worth a great deal: but yet the return
is made according to the estimate of those who have received first, it
should perhaps be added that the receiver should estimate what he has
received, not by the value he sets upon it now that he has it, but by
that which he set upon it before he obtained it.


II

Questions also arise upon such points as the following: Whether one's
father has an unlimited claim on one's services and obedience, or
whether the sick man is to obey his physician? or, in an election of
a general, the warlike qualities of the candidates should be alone
regarded?

In like manner whether one should do a service rather to one's friend or
to a good man? whether one should rather requite a benefactor or give to
one's companion, supposing that both are not within one's power?

[Sidenote: 1165a] Is not the true answer that it is no easy task to
determine all such questions accurately, inasmuch as they involve
numerous differences of all kinds, in respect of amount and what is
honourable and what is necessary? It is obvious, of course, that no one
person can unite in himself all claims. Again, the requital of benefits
is, in general, a higher duty than doing unsolicited kindnesses to one's
companion; in other words, the discharging of a debt is more obligatory
upon one than the duty of giving to a companion. And yet this rule may
admit of exceptions; for instance, which is the higher duty? for one who
has been ransomed out of the hands of robbers to ransom in return his
ransomer, be he who he may, or to repay him on his demand though he has
not been taken by robbers, or to ransom his own father? for it would
seem that a man ought to ransom his father even in preference to
himself.

Well then, as has been said already, as a general rule the debt
should be discharged, but if in a particular case the giving greatly
preponderates as being either honourable or necessary, we must be swayed
by these considerations: I mean, in some cases the requital of the
obligation previously existing may not be equal; suppose, for instance,
that the original benefactor has conferred a kindness on a good man,
knowing him to be such, whereas this said good man has to repay it
believing him to be a scoundrel.

And again, in certain cases no obligation lies on a man to lend to one
who has lent to him; suppose, for instance, that a bad man lent to him,
as being a good man, under the notion that he should get repaid, whereas
the said good man has no hope of repayment from him being a bad man.
Either then the case is really as we have supposed it and then the claim
is not equal, or it is not so but supposed to be; and still in so acting
people are not to be thought to act wrongly. In short, as has been
oftentimes stated before, all statements regarding feelings and actions
can be definite only in proportion as their object-matter is so; it is
of course quite obvious that all people have not the same claim upon
one, nor are the claims of one's father unlimited; just as Jupiter does
not claim all kinds of sacrifice without distinction: and since the
claims of parents, brothers, companions, and benefactors, are all
different, we must give to each what belongs to and befits each.

And this is seen to be the course commonly pursued: to marriages men
commonly invite their relatives, because these are from a common stock
and therefore all the actions in any way pertaining thereto are common
also: and to funerals men think that relatives ought to assemble in
preference to other people, for the same reason.

And it would seem that in respect of maintenance it is our duty to
assist our parents in preference to all others, as being their debtors,
and because it is more honourable to succour in these respects the
authors of our existence than ourselves. Honour likewise we ought to pay
to our parents just as to the gods, but then, not all kinds of honour:
not the same, for instance, to a father as to a mother: nor again to a
father the honour due to a scientific man or to a general but that
which is a father's due, and in like manner to a mother that which is a
mother's.

To all our elders also the honour befitting their age, by rising up in
their presence, turning out of the way for them, and all similar marks
of respect: to our companions again, or brothers, frankness and free
participation in all we have. And to those of the same family, or tribe,
or city, with ourselves, and all similarly connected with us, we should
constantly try to render their due, and to discriminate what belongs to
each in respect of nearness of connection, or goodness, or intimacy:
of course in the case of those of the same class the discrimination is
easier; in that of those who are in different classes it is a matter of
more trouble. This, however, should not be a reason for giving up
the attempt, but we must observe the distinctions so far as it is
practicable to do so.

III

A question is also raised as to the propriety of dissolving or not
dissolving those Friendships the parties to which do not remain what
they were when the connection was formed.

[Sidenote: 1165b] Now surely in respect of those whose motive to
Friendship is utility or pleasure there can be nothing wrong in breaking
up the connection when they no longer have those qualities; because they
were friends [not of one another, but] of those qualities: and, these
having failed, it is only reasonable to expect that they should cease to
entertain the sentiment.

But a man has reason to find fault if the other party, being really
attached to him because of advantage or pleasure, pretended to be so
because of his moral character: in fact, as we said at the commencement,
the most common source of quarrels between friends is their not being
friends on the same grounds as they suppose themselves to be.

Now when a man has been deceived in having supposed himself to excite
the sentiment of Friendship by reason of his moral character, the other
party doing nothing to indicate he has but himself to blame: but when he
has been deceived by the pretence of the other he has a right to find
fault with the man who has so deceived him, aye even more than with
utterers of false coin, in proportion to the greater preciousness of
that which is the object-matter of the villany.

But suppose a man takes up another as being a good man, who turns out,
and is found by him, to be a scoundrel, is he bound still to entertain
Friendship for him? or may we not say at once it is impossible? since
it is not everything which is the object-matter of Friendship, but only
that which is good; and so there is no obligation to be a bad man's
friend, nor, in fact, ought one to be such: for one ought not to be a
lover of evil, nor to be assimilated to what is base; which would be
implied, because we have said before, like is friendly to like.

Are we then to break with him instantly? not in all cases; only where
our friends are incurably depraved; when there is a chance of amendment
we are bound to aid in repairing the moral character of our friends
even more than their substance, in proportion as it is better and
more closely related to Friendship. Still he who should break off the
connection is not to be judged to act wrongly, for he never was a friend
to such a character as the other now is, and therefore, since the man is
changed and he cannot reduce him to his original state, he backs out of
the connection.

To put another case: suppose that one party remains what he was when
the Friendship was formed, while the other becomes morally improved and
widely different from his friend in goodness; is the improved character
to treat the other as a friend?

May we not say it is impossible? The case of course is clearest where
there is a great difference, as in the Friendships of boys: for suppose
that of two boyish friends the one still continues a boy in mind and the
other becomes a man of the highest character, how can they be friends?
since they neither are pleased with the same objects nor like and
dislike the same things: for these points will not belong to them as
regards one another, and without them it was assumed they cannot be
friends because they cannot live in intimacy: and of the case of those
who cannot do so we have spoken before.

Well then, is the improved party to bear himself towards his former
friend in no way differently to what he would have done had the
connection never existed?

Surely he ought to bear in mind the intimacy of past times, and just as
we think ourselves bound to do favours for our friends in preference to
strangers, so to those who have been friends and are so no longer we
should allow somewhat on the score of previous Friendship, whenever the
cause of severance is not excessive depravity on their part.




IV

[Sidenote: II66a] Now the friendly feelings which are exhibited towards
our friends, and by which Friendships are characterised, seem to have
sprung out of those which we entertain toward ourselves. I mean, people
define a friend to be "one who intends and does what is good (or what
he believes to be good) to another for that other's sake," or "one who
wishes his friend to be and to live for that friend's own sake" (which
is the feeling of mothers towards their children, and of friends who
have come into collision). Others again, "one who lives with another and
chooses the same objects," or "one who sympathises with his friend in
his sorrows and in his joys" (this too is especially the case with
mothers).

Well, by some one of these marks people generally characterise
Friendship: and each of these the good man has towards himself, and all
others have them in so far as they suppose themselves to be good. (For,
as has been said before, goodness, that is the good man, seems to be a
measure to every one else.)

For he is at unity in himself, and with every part of his soul he
desires the same objects; and he wishes for himself both what is, and
what he believes to be, good; and he does it (it being characteristic
of the good man to work at what is good), and for the sake of himself,
inasmuch as he does it for the sake of his Intellectual Principle which
is generally thought to be a man's Self. Again, he wishes himself And
specially this Principle whereby he is an intelligent being, to live and
be preserved in life, because existence is a good to him that is a good
man.

But it is to himself that each individual wishes what is good, and no
man, conceiving the possibility of his becoming other than he now is,
chooses that that New Self should have all things indiscriminately: a
god, for instance, has at the present moment the Chief Good, but he has
it in right of being whatever he actually now is: and the Intelligent
Principle must be judged to be each man's Self, or at least eminently so
[though other Principles help, of course, to constitute him the man he
is]. Furthermore, the good man wishes to continue to live with himself;
for he can do it with pleasure, in that his memories of past actions are
full of delight and his anticipations of the future are good and such
are pleasurable. Then, again, he has good store of matter for his
Intellect to contemplate, and he most especially sympathises with his
Self in its griefs and joys, because the objects which give him pain and
pleasure are at all times the same, not one thing to-day and a different
one to-morrow: because he is not given to repentance, if one may so
speak. It is then because each of these feelings are entertained by the
good man towards his own Self and a friend feels towards a friend as
towards himself (a friend being in fact another Self), that Friendship
is thought to be some one of these things and they are accounted friends
in whom they are found. Whether or no there can really be Friendship
between a man and his Self is a question we will not at present
entertain: there may be thought to be Friendship, in so far as there are
two or more of the aforesaid requisites, and because the highest degree
of Friendship, in the usual acceptation of that term, resembles the
feeling entertained by a man towards himself.

[Sidenote: 1166b] But it may be urged that the aforesaid requisites are
to all appearance found in the common run of men, though they are men of
a low stamp.

May it not be answered, that they share in them only in so far as they
please themselves, and conceive themselves to be good? for certainly,
they are not either really, or even apparently, found in any one of
those who are very depraved and villainous; we may almost say not
even in those who are bad men at all: for they are at variance with
themselves and lust after different things from those which in cool
reason they wish for, just as men who fail of Self-Control: I mean, they
choose things which, though hurtful, are pleasurable, in preference to
those which in their own minds they believe to be good: others again,
from cowardice and indolence, decline to do what still they are
convinced is best for them: while they who from their depravity have
actually done many dreadful actions hate and avoid life, and accordingly
kill themselves: and the wicked seek others in whose company to spend
their time, but fly from themselves because they have many unpleasant
subjects of memory, and can only look forward to others like them when
in solitude but drown their remorse in the company of others: and as
they have nothing to raise the sentiment of Friendship so they never
feel it towards themselves.

Neither, in fact, can they who are of this character sympathise with
their Selves in their joys and sorrows, because their soul is, as it
were, rent by faction, and the one principle, by reason of the depravity
in them, is grieved at abstaining from certain things, while the other
and better principle is pleased thereat; and the one drags them this way
and the other that way, as though actually tearing them asunder. And
though it is impossible actually to have at the same time the sensations
of pain and pleasure; yet after a little time the man is sorry for
having been pleased, and he could wish that those objects had not given
him pleasure; for the wicked are full of remorse.

It is plain then that the wicked man cannot be in the position of a
friend even towards himself, because he has in himself nothing which can
excite the sentiment of Friendship. If then to be thus is exceedingly
wretched it is a man's duty to flee from wickedness with all his might
and to strive to be good, because thus may he be friends with himself
and may come to be a friend to another.

[Sidenote: V] Kindly Feeling, though resembling Friendship, is not
identical with it, because it may exist in reference to those whom we
do not know and without the object of it being aware of its existence,
which Friendship cannot. (This, by the way, has also been said before.)
And further, it is not even Affection because it does not imply
intensity nor yearning, which are both consequences of Affection. Again
Affection requires intimacy but Kindly Feeling may arise quite suddenly,
as happens sometimes in respect of men against whom people are matched
in any way, I mean they come to be kindly disposed to them and
sympathise in their wishes, but still they would not join them in any
action, because, as we said, they conceive this feeling of kindness
suddenly and so have but a superficial liking.

What it does seem to be is the starting point of a Friendship; just as
pleasure, received through the sight, is the commencement of Love: for
no one falls in love without being first pleased with the personal
appearance of the beloved object, and yet he who takes pleasure in it
does not therefore necessarily love, but when he wearies for the object
in its absence and desires its presence. Exactly in the same way men
cannot be friends without having passed through the stage of Kindly
Feeling, and yet they who are in that stage do not necessarily advance
to Friendship: they merely have an inert wish for the good of those
toward whom they entertain the feeling, but would not join them in
any action, nor put themselves out of the way for them. So that, in
a metaphorical way of speaking, one might say that it is dormant
Friendship, and when it has endured for a space and ripened into
intimacy comes to be real Friendship; but not that whose object is
advantage or pleasure, because such motives cannot produce even Kindly
Feeling.

I mean, he who has received a kindness requites it by Kindly Feeling
towards his benefactor, and is right in so doing: but he who wishes
another to be prosperous, because he has hope of advantage through his
instrumentality, does not seem to be kindly disposed to that person but
rather to himself; just as neither is he his friend if he pays court to
him for any interested purpose.

Kindly Feeling always arises by reason of goodness and a certain
amiability, when one man gives another the notion of being a fine
fellow, or brave man, etc., as we said was the case sometimes with those
matched against one another.

[Sidenote: VI] Unity of Sentiment is also plainly connected with
Friendship, and therefore is not the same as Unity of Opinion,
because this might exist even between people unacquainted with one
another.

Nor do men usually say people are united in sentiment merely because
they agree in opinion on _any_ point, as, for instance, on points
of astronomical science (Unity of Sentiment herein not having any
connection with Friendship), but they say that Communities have Unity of
Sentiment when they agree respecting points of expediency and take the
same line and carry out what has been determined in common consultation.

Thus we see that Unity of Sentiment has for its object matters of
action, and such of these as are of importance, and of mutual, or, in
the case of single States, common, interest: when, for instance, all
agree in the choice of magistrates, or forming alliance with the
Laced\E6monians, or appointing Pittacus ruler (that is to say, supposing
he himself was willing). [Sidenote: 1167_b_] But when each wishes
himself to be in power (as the brothers in the Phoeniss\E6), they quarrel
and form parties: for, plainly, Unity of Sentiment does not merely imply
that each entertains the same idea be it what it may, but that they do
so in respect of the same object, as when both the populace and the
sensible men of a State desire that the best men should be in office,
because then all attain their object.

Thus Unity of Sentiment is plainly a social Friendship, as it is also
said to be: since it has for its object-matter things expedient and
relating to life.

And this Unity exists among the good: for they have it towards
themselves and towards one another, being, if I may be allowed the
expression, in the same position: I mean, the wishes of such men are
steady and do not ebb and flow like the Euripus, and they wish what is
just and expedient and aim at these things in common.

The bad, on the contrary, can as little have Unity of Sentiment as they
can be real friends, except to a very slight extent, desiring as they
do unfair advantage in things profitable while they shirk labour and
service for the common good: and while each man wishes for these things
for himself he is jealous of and hinders his neighbour: and as they
do not watch over the common good it is lost. The result is that they
quarrel while they are for keeping one another to work but are not
willing to perform their just share.

[Sidenote: VII] Benefactors are commonly held to have more Friendship
for the objects of their kindness than these for them: and the fact
is made a subject of discussion and inquiry, as being contrary to
reasonable expectation.

The account of the matter which satisfies most persons is that the one
are debtors and the others creditors: and therefore that, as in the case
of actual loans the debtors wish their creditors out of the way while
the creditors are anxious for the preservation of their debtors, so
those who have done kindnesses desire the continued existence of the
people they have done them to, under the notion of getting a return
of their good offices, while these are not particularly anxious about
requital.

Epicharmus, I suspect, would very probably say that they who give this
solution judge from their own baseness; yet it certainly is like human
nature, for the generality of men have short memories on these points,
and aim rather at receiving than conferring benefits.

But the real cause, it would seem, rests upon nature, and the case is
not parallel to that of creditors; because in this there is no affection
to the persons, but merely a wish for their preservation with a view to
the return: whereas, in point of fact, they who have done kindnesses
feel friendship and love for those to whom they have done them, even
though they neither are, nor can by possibility hereafter be, in a
position to serve their benefactors.

[Sidenote: 1168_a_] And this is the case also with artisans; every one,
I mean, feels more affection for his own work than that work possibly
could for him if it were animate. It is perhaps specially the case with
poets: for these entertain very great affection for their poems, loving
them as their own children. It is to this kind of thing I should be
inclined to compare the case of benefactors: for the object of their
kindness is their own work, and so they love this more than this loves
its creator.

And the account of this is that existence is to all a thing choiceworthy
and an object of affection; now we exist by acts of working, that is, by
living and acting; he then that has created a given work exists, it may
be said, by his act of working: therefore he loves his work because he
loves existence. And this is natural, for the work produced displays in
act what existed before potentially.

Then again, the benefactor has a sense of honour in right of his action,
so that he may well take pleasure in him in whom this resides; but to
him who has received the benefit there is nothing honourable in respect
of his benefactor, only something advantageous which is both less
pleasant and less the object of Friendship.

Again, pleasure is derived from the actual working out of a present
action, from the anticipation of a future one, and from the recollection
of a past one: but the highest pleasure and special object of affection
is that which attends on the actual working. Now the benefactor's work
abides (for the honourable is enduring), but the advantage of him who
has received the kindness passes away.

Again, there is pleasure in recollecting honourable actions, but in
recollecting advantageous ones there is none at all or much less (by the
way though, the contrary is true of the expectation of advantage).

Further, the entertaining the feeling of Friendship is like acting on
another; but being the object of the feeling is like being acted upon.

So then, entertaining the sentiment of Friendship, and all feelings
connected with it, attend on those who, in the given case of a
benefaction, are the superior party.

Once more: all people value most what has cost them much labour in the
production; for instance, people who have themselves made their money
are fonder of it than those who have inherited it: and receiving
kindness is, it seems, unlaborious, but doing it is laborious. And this
is the reason why the female parents are most fond of their offspring;
for their part in producing them is attended with most labour, and they
know more certainly that they are theirs. This feeling would seem also
to belong to benefactors.

[Sidenote: VIII] A question is also raised as to whether it is right
to love one's Self best, or some one else: because men find fault with
those who love themselves best, and call them in a disparaging way
lovers of Self; and the bad man is thought to do everything he does
for his own sake merely, and the more so the more depraved he is;
accordingly men reproach him with never doing anything unselfish:
whereas the good man acts from a sense of honour (and the more so the
better man he is), and for his friend's sake, and is careless of his own
interest.

[Sidenote: 1168_b_] But with these theories facts are at variance, and
not unnaturally: for it is commonly said also that a man is to love most
him who is most his friend, and he is most a friend who wishes good to
him to whom he wishes it for that man's sake even though no one knows.
Now these conditions, and in fact all the rest by which a friend is
characterised, belong specially to each individual in respect of his
Self: for we have said before that all the friendly feelings are derived
to others from those which have Self primarily for their object. And all
the current proverbs support this view; for instance, "one soul," "the
goods of friends are common," "equality is a tie of Friendship," "the
knee is nearer than the shin." For all these things exist specially with
reference to a man's own Self: he is specially a friend to himself and
so he is bound to love himself the most.

It is with good reason questioned which of the two parties one should
follow, both having plausibility on their side. Perhaps then, in respect
of theories of this kind, the proper course is to distinguish and define
how far each is true, and in what way. If we could ascertain the sense
in which each uses the term "Self-loving," this point might be cleared
up.

Well now, they who use it disparagingly give the name to those who,
in respect of wealth, and honours, and pleasures of the body, give to
themselves the larger share: because the mass of mankind grasp after
these and are earnest about them as being the best things; which is the
reason why they are matters of contention. They who are covetous in
regard to these gratify their lusts and passions in general, that is to
say the irrational part of their soul: now the mass of mankind are so
disposed, for which reason the appellation has taken its rise from that
mass which is low and bad. Of course they are justly reproached who are
Self-loving in this sense.

And that the generality of men are accustomed to apply the term to
denominate those who do give such things to themselves is quite plain:
suppose, for instance, that a man were anxious to do, more than other
men, acts of justice, or self-mastery, or any other virtuous acts, and,
in general, were to secure to himself that which is abstractedly noble
and honourable, no one would call him Self-loving, nor blame him.

Yet might such an one be judged to be more truly Self-loving: certainly
he gives to himself the things which are most noble and most good,
and gratifies that Principle of his nature which is most rightfully
authoritative, and obeys it in everything: and just as that which
possesses the highest authority is thought to constitute a Community or
any other system, so also in the case of Man: and so he is most truly
Self-loving who loves and gratifies this Principle.

Again, men are said to have, or to fail of having, self-control,
according as the Intellect controls or not, it being plainly implied
thereby that this Principle constitutes each individual; and people are
thought to have done of themselves, and voluntarily, those things
specially which are done with Reason. [Sidenote: 1169_a_]

It is plain, therefore, that this Principle does, either entirely or
specially constitute the individual man, and that the good man specially
loves this. For this reason then he must be specially Self-loving, in a
kind other than that which is reproached, and as far superior to it as
living in accordance with Reason is to living at the beck and call of
passion, and aiming at the truly noble to aiming at apparent advantage.

Now all approve and commend those who are eminently earnest about
honourable actions, and if all would vie with one another in respect of
the [Greek: kalhon], and be intent upon doing what is most truly noble
and honourable, society at large would have all that is proper while
each individual in particular would have the greatest of goods, Virtue
being assumed to be such.

And so the good man ought to be Self-loving: because by doing what is
noble he will have advantage himself and will do good to others: but the
bad man ought not to be, because he will harm himself and his neighbours
by following low and evil passions. In the case of the bad man, what he
ought to do and what he does are at variance, but the good man does what
he ought to do, because all Intellect chooses what is best for itself
and the good man puts himself under the direction of Intellect.

Of the good man it is true likewise that he does many things for the
sake of his friends and his country, even to the extent of dying for
them, if need be: for money and honours, and, in short, all the good
things which others fight for, he will throw away while eager to secure
to himself the [Greek: kalhon]: he will prefer a brief and great joy
to a tame and enduring one, and to live nobly for one year rather than
ordinarily for many, and one great and noble action to many trifling
ones. And this is perhaps that which befals men who die for their
country and friends; they choose great glory for themselves: and they
will lavish their own money that their friends may receive more, for
hereby the friend gets the money but the man himself the [Greek:
kalhon]; so, in fact he gives to himself the greater good. It is the
same with honours and offices; all these things he will give up to his
friend, because this reflects honour and praise on himself: and so
with good reason is he esteemed a fine character since he chooses the
honourable before all things else. It is possible also to give up the
opportunities of action to a friend; and to have caused a friend's doing
a thing may be more noble than having done it one's self.

In short, in all praiseworthy things the good man does plainly give to
himself a larger share of the honourable. [Sidenote: 1169_b_] In this
sense it is right to be Self-loving, in the vulgar acceptation of the
term it is not.

[Sidenote: IX] A question is raised also respecting the Happy man,
whether he will want Friends, or no?

Some say that they who are blessed and independent have no need of
Friends, for they already have all that is good, and so, as being
independent, want nothing further: whereas the notion of a friend's
office is to be as it were a second Self and procure for a man what he
cannot get by himself: hence the saying,

  "When Fortune gives us good, what need we Friends?"

On the other hand, it looks absurd, while we are assigning to the Happy
man all other good things, not to give him Friends, which are, after
all, thought to be the greatest of external goods.

Again, if it is more characteristic of a friend to confer than to
receive kindnesses, and if to be beneficent belongs to the good man and
to the character of virtue, and if it is more noble to confer kindnesses
on friends than strangers, the good man will need objects for his
benefactions. And out of this last consideration springs a question
whether the need of Friends be greater in prosperity or adversity, since
the unfortunate man wants people to do him kindnesses and they who are
fortunate want objects for their kind acts.

Again, it is perhaps absurd to make our Happy man a solitary, because
no man would choose the possession of all goods in the world on the
condition of solitariness, man being a social animal and formed by
nature for living with others: of course the Happy man has this
qualification since he has all those things which are good by nature:
and it is obvious that the society of friends and good men must be
preferable to that of strangers and ordinary people, and we conclude,
therefore, that the Happy man does need Friends.

But then, what do they mean whom we quoted first, and how are they
right? Is it not that the mass of mankind mean by Friends those who are
useful? and of course the Happy man will not need such because he has
all good things already; neither will he need such as are Friends with
a view to the pleasurable, or at least only to a slight extent; because
his life, being already pleasurable, does not want pleasure imported
from without; and so, since the Happy man does not need Friends of these
kinds, he is thought not to need any at all.

But it may be, this is not true: for it was stated originally, that
Happiness is a kind of Working; now Working plainly is something
that must come into being, not be already there like a mere piece of
property.

[Sidenote: 1170_a_] If then the being happy consists in living and
working, and the good man's working is in itself excellent and
pleasurable (as we said at the commencement of the treatise), and if
what is our own reckons among things pleasurable, and if we can view our
neighbours better than ourselves and their actions better than we
can our own, then the actions of their Friends who are good men are
pleasurable to the good; inasmuch as they have both the requisites which
are naturally pleasant. So the man in the highest state of happiness
will need Friends of this kind, since he desires to contemplate good
actions, and actions of his own, which those of his friend, being a good
man, are. Again, common opinion requires that the Happy man live with
pleasure to himself: now life is burthensome to a man in solitude, for
it is not easy to work continuously by one's self, but in company with,
and in regard to others, it is easier, and therefore the working, being
pleasurable in itself will be more continuous (a thing which should be
in respect of the Happy man); for the good man, in that he is good takes
pleasure in the actions which accord with Virtue and is annoyed at those
which spring from Vice, just as a musical man is pleased with beautiful
music and annoyed by bad. And besides, as Theognis says, Virtue itself
may be improved by practice, from living with the good.

And, upon the following considerations more purely metaphysical, it will
probably appear that the good friend is naturally choiceworthy to the
good man. We have said before, that whatever is naturally good is also
in itself good and pleasant to the good man; now the fact of living, so
far as animals are concerned, is characterised generally by the power
of sentience, in man it is characterised by that of sentience, or
of rationality (the faculty of course being referred to the actual
operation of the faculty, certainly the main point is the actual
operation of it); so that living seems mainly to consist in the act of
sentience or exerting rationality: now the fact of living is in itself
one of the things that are good and pleasant (for it is a definite
totality, and whatever is such belongs to the nature of good), but what
is naturally good is good to the good man: for which reason it seems
to be pleasant to all. (Of course one must not suppose a life which is
depraved and corrupted, nor one spent in pain, for that which is such is
indefinite as are its inherent qualities: however, what is to be said of
pain will be clearer in what is to follow.)

If then the fact of living is in itself good and pleasant (and this
appears from the fact that all desire it, and specially those who are
good and in high happiness; their course of life being most choiceworthy
and their existence most choiceworthy likewise), then also he that sees
perceives that he sees; and he that hears perceives that he hears; and
he that walks perceives that he walks; and in all the other instances
in like manner there is a faculty which reflects upon and perceives the
fact that we are working, so that we can perceive that we perceive and
intellectually know that we intellectually know: but to perceive that we
perceive or that we intellectually know is to perceive that we exist,
since existence was defined to be perceiving or intellectually knowing.
[Sidenote: 1170_b_ Now to perceive that one lives is a thing pleasant
in itself, life being a thing naturally good, and the perceiving of the
presence in ourselves of things naturally good being pleasant.]

Therefore the fact of living is choiceworthy, and to the good specially
so since existence is good and pleasant to them: for they receive
pleasure from the internal consciousness of that which in itself is
good.

But the good man is to his friend as to himself, friend being but a name
for a second Self; therefore as his own existence is choiceworthy to
each so too, or similarly at least, is his friend's existence. But the
ground of one's own existence being choiceworthy is the perceiving of
one's self being good, any such perception being in itself pleasant.
Therefore one ought to be thoroughly conscious of one's friend's
existence, which will result from living with him, that is sharing in
his words and thoughts: for this is the meaning of the term as applied
to the human species, not mere feeding together as in the case of
brutes.

If then to the man in a high state of happiness existence is in itself
choiceworthy, being naturally good and pleasant, and so too a friend's
existence, then the friend also must be among things choiceworthy. But
whatever is choiceworthy to a man he should have or else he will be in
this point deficient. The man therefore who is to come up to our notion
"Happy" will need good Friends. Are we then to make our friends as
numerous as possible? or, as in respect of acquaintance it is thought
to have been well said "have not thou many acquaintances yet be not
without;" so too in respect of Friendship may we adopt the precept, and
say that a man should not be without friends, nor again have exceeding
many friends?

Now as for friends who are intended for use, the maxim I have quoted
will, it seems, fit in exceedingly well, because to requite the services
of many is a matter of labour, and a whole life would not be long enough
to do this for them. So that, if more numerous than what will suffice
for one's own life, they become officious, and are hindrances in respect
of living well: and so we do not want them. And again of those who are
to be for pleasure a few are quite enough, just like sweetening in our
food.




X


But of the good are we to make as many as ever we can, or is there
any measure of the number of friends, as there is of the number to
constitute a Political Community? I mean, you cannot make one out of ten
men, and if you increase the number to one hundred thousand it is not
any longer a Community. However, the number is not perhaps some one
definite number but any between certain extreme limits.

[Sidenote: 1171_a_] Well, of friends likewise there is a limited number,
which perhaps may be laid down to be the greatest number with whom it
would be possible to keep up intimacy; this being thought to be one of
the greatest marks of Friendship, and it being quite obvious that it is
not possible to be intimate with many, in other words, to part one's
self among many. And besides it must be remembered that they also are to
be friends to one another if they are all to live together: but it is a
matter of difficulty to find this in many men at once.

It comes likewise to be difficult to bring home to one's self the joys
and sorrows of many: because in all probability one would have to
sympathise at the same time with the joys of this one and the sorrows of
that other.

Perhaps then it is well not to endeavour to have very many friends but
so many as are enough for intimacy: because, in fact, it would seem not
to be possible to be very much a friend to many at the same time: and,
for the same reason, not to be in love with many objects at the same
time: love being a kind of excessive Friendship which implies but one
object: and all strong emotions must be limited in the number towards
whom they are felt.

And if we look to facts this seems to be so: for not many at a time
become friends in the way of companionship, all the famous Friendships
of the kind are between _two_ persons: whereas they who have many
friends, and meet everybody on the footing of intimacy, seem to be
friends really to no one except in the way of general society; I mean
the characters denominated as over-complaisant.

To be sure, in the way merely of society, a man may be a friend to many
without being necessarily over-complaisant, but being truly good: but
one cannot be a friend to many because of their virtue, and for the
persons' own sake; in fact, it is a matter for contentment to find even
a few such.


XI

Again: are friends most needed in prosperity or in adversity? they are
required, we know, in both states, because the unfortunate need help and
the prosperous want people to live with and to do kindnesses to: for
they have a desire to act kindly to some one.

To have friends is more necessary in adversity, and therefore in this
case useful ones are wanted; and to have them in prosperity is more
honourable, and this is why the prosperous want good men for friends, it
being preferable to confer benefits on, and to live with, these. For the
very presence of friends is pleasant even in adversity: since men when
grieved are comforted by the sympathy of their friends.

And from this, by the way, the question might be raised, whether it is
that they do in a manner take part of the weight of calamities, or only
that their presence, being pleasurable, and the consciousness of their
sympathy, make the pain of the sufferer less. However, we will not
further discuss whether these which have been suggested or some other
causes produce the relief, at least the effect we speak of is a matter
of plain fact.

[Sidenote: _1171b_] But their presence has probably a mixed effect: I
mean, not only is the very seeing friends pleasant, especially to one in
misfortune, and actual help towards lessening the grief is afforded
(the natural tendency of a friend, if he is gifted with tact, being
to comfort by look and word, because he is well acquainted with the
sufferer's temper and disposition and therefore knows what things give
him pleasure and pain), but also the perceiving a friend to be grieved
at his misfortunes causes the sufferer pain, because every one avoids
being cause of pain to his friends. And for this reason they who are
of a manly nature are cautious not to implicate their friends in their
pain; and unless a man is exceedingly callous to the pain of others he
cannot bear the pain which is thus caused to his friends: in short, he
does not admit men to wail with him, not being given to wail at all:
women, it is true, and men who resemble women, like to have others to
groan with them, and love such as friends and sympathisers. But it
is plain that it is our duty in all things to imitate the highest
character.

On the other hand, the advantages of friends in our prosperity are the
pleasurable intercourse and the consciousness that they are pleased at
our good fortune.

It would seem, therefore, that we ought to call in friends readily on
occasion of good fortune, because it is noble to be ready to do good to
others: but on occasion of bad fortune, we should do so with reluctance;
for we should as little as possible make others share in our ills; on
which principle goes the saying, "I am unfortunate, let that suffice."
The most proper occasion for calling them in is when with small trouble
or annoyance to themselves they can be of very great use to the person
who needs them.

But, on the contrary, it is fitting perhaps to go to one's friends in
their misfortunes unasked and with alacrity (because kindness is the
friend's office and specially towards those who are in need and who do
not demand it as a right, this being more creditable and more pleasant
to both); and on occasion of their good fortune to go readily, if we
can forward it in any way (because men need their friends for this
likewise), but to be backward in sharing it, any great eagerness to
receive advantage not being creditable.

One should perhaps be cautious not to present the appearance of
sullenness in declining the sympathy or help of friends, for this
happens occasionally.

It appears then that the presence of friends is, under all
circumstances, choiceworthy.

May we not say then that, as seeing the beloved object is most prized by
lovers and they choose this sense rather than any of the others because
Love

  "Is engendered in the eyes,
  With gazing fed,"

in like manner intimacy is to friends most choiceworthy, Friendship
being communion? Again, as a man is to himself so is he to his friend;
now with respect to himself the perception of his own existence is
choiceworthy, therefore is it also in respect of his friend.

And besides, their Friendship is acted out in intimacy, and so with good
reason they desire this. And whatever in each man's opinion constitutes
existence, or whatsoever it is for the sake of which they choose life,
herein they wish their friends to join with them; and so some men drink
together, others gamble, others join in gymnastic exercises or hunting,
others study philosophy together: in each case spending their days
together in that which they like best of all things in life, for since
they wish to be intimate with their friends they do and partake in those
things whereby they think to attain this object.

Therefore the Friendship of the wicked comes to be depraved; for, being
unstable, they share in what is bad and become depraved in being made
like to one another: but the Friendship of the good is good, growing
with their intercourse; they improve also, as it seems, by repeated
acts, and by mutual correction, for they receive impress from one
another in the points which give them pleasure; whence says the poet,

  "Thou from the good, good things shalt surely learn."

Here then we will terminate our discourse of Friendship. The next thing
is to go into the subject of Pleasure.




BOOK X


Next, it would seem, follows a discussion respecting Pleasure, for it is
thought to be most closely bound up with our kind: and so men train the
young, guiding them on their course by the rudders of Pleasure and Pain.
And to like and dislike what one ought is judged to be most important
for the formation of good moral character: because these feelings extend
all one's life through, giving a bias towards and exerting an influence
on the side of Virtue and Happiness, since men choose what is pleasant
and avoid what is painful.

Subjects such as these then, it would seem, we ought by no means to pass
by, and specially since they involve much difference of opinion. There
are those who call Pleasure the Chief Good; there are others who on the
contrary maintain that it is exceedingly bad; some perhaps from a real
conviction that such is the case, others from a notion that it is
better, in reference to our life and conduct, to show up Pleasure as
bad, even if it is not so really; arguing that, as the mass of men have
a bias towards it and are the slaves of their pleasures, it is right to
draw them to the contrary, for that so they may possibly arrive at the
mean.

I confess I suspect the soundness of this policy; in matters respecting
men's feelings and actions theories are less convincing than facts:
whenever, therefore, they are found conflicting with actual experience,
they not only are despised but involve the truth in their fall: he, for
instance, who deprecates Pleasure, if once seen to aim at it, gets the
credit of backsliding to it as being universally such as he said it was,
the mass of men being incapable of nice distinctions.

Real accounts, therefore, of such matters seem to be most expedient, not
with a view to knowledge merely but to life and conduct: for they are
believed as being in harm with facts, and so they prevail with the wise
to live in accordance with them.

But of such considerations enough: let us now proceed to the current
maxims respecting Pleasure.

II Now Eudoxus thought Pleasure to be the Chief Good because he saw all,
rational and irrational alike, aiming at it: and he argued that, since
in all what was the object of choice must be good and what most so the
best, the fact of all being drawn to the same thing proved this thing to
be the best for all: "For each," he said, "finds what is good for itself
just as it does its proper nourishment, and so that which is good for
all, and the object of the aim of all, is their Chief Good."

(And his theories were received, not so much for their own sake, as
because of his excellent moral character; for he was thought to be
eminently possessed of perfect self-mastery, and therefore it was not
thought that he said these things because he was a lover of Pleasure but
that he really was so convinced.)

And he thought his position was not less proved by the argument from the
contrary: that is, since Pain was in itself an object of avoidance to
all the contrary must be in like manner an object of choice.

Again he urged that that is most choiceworthy which we choose, not by
reason of, or with a view to, anything further; and that Pleasure is
confessedly of this kind because no one ever goes on to ask to what
purpose he is pleased, feeling that Pleasure is in itself choiceworthy.

Again, that when added to any other good it makes it more choiceworthy;
as, for instance, to actions of justice, or perfected self-mastery; and
good can only be increased by itself.

However, this argument at least seems to prove only that it belongs to
the class of goods, and not that it does so more than anything else: for
every good is more choicewortby in combination with some other than when
taken quite alone. In fact, it is by just such an argument that Plato
proves that Pleasure is not the Chief Good: "For," says he, "the life of
Pleasure is more choiceworthy in combination with Practical Wisdom than
apart from it; but, if the compound better then simple Pleasure cannot
be the Chief Good; because the very Chief Good cannot by any addition
become choiceworthy than it is already:" and it is obvious that nothing
else can be the Chief Good, which by combination with any of the things
in themselves good comes to be more choiceworthy.

What is there then of such a nature? (meaning, of course, whereof we can
partake; because that which we are in search of must be such).

As for those who object that "what all aim at is not necessarily good,"
I confess I cannot see much in what they say, because what all _think_
we say _is_. And he who would cut away this ground from under us will
not bring forward things more dependable: because if the argument had
rested on the desires of irrational creatures there might have been
something in what he says, but, since the rational also desire Pleasure,
how can his objection be allowed any weight? and it may be that, even in
the lower animals, there is some natural good principle above themselves
which aims at the good peculiar to them.

Nor does that seem to be sound which is urged respecting the argument
from the contrary: I mean, some people say "it does not follow that
Pleasure must be good because Pain is evil, since evil may be opposed to
evil, and both evil and good to what is indifferent:" now what they say
is right enough in itself but does not hold in the present instance.
If both Pleasure and Pain were bad both would have been objects of
avoidance; or if neither then neither would have been, at all events
they must have fared alike: but now men do plainly avoid the one as bad
and choose the other as good, and so there is a complete opposition. III
Nor again is Pleasure therefore excluded from being good because it
does not belong to the class of qualities: the acts of virtue are not
qualities, neither is Happiness [yet surely both are goods].

Again, they say the Chief Good is limited but Pleasure unlimited, in
that it admits of degrees.

Now if they judge this from the act of feeling Pleasure then the same
thing will apply to justice and all the other virtues, in respect of
which clearly it is said that men are more or less of such and such
characters (according to the different virtues), they are more just or
more brave, or one may practise justice and self-mastery more or less.

If, on the other hand, they judge in respect of the Pleasures themselves
then it may be they miss the true cause, namely that some are unmixed
and others mixed: for just as health being in itself limited, admits of
degrees, why should not Pleasure do so and yet be limited? in the former
case we account for it by the fact that there is not the same adjustment
of parts in all men, nor one and the same always in the same individual:
but health, though relaxed, remains up to a certain point, and differs
in degrees; and of course the same may be the case with Pleasure.

Again, assuming the Chief Good to be perfect and all Movements and
Generations imperfect, they try to shew that Pleasure is a Movement and
a Generation.

Yet they do not seem warranted in saying even that it is a Movement: for
to every Movement are thought to belong swiftness and slowness, and
if not in itself, as to that of the universe, yet relatively: but to
Pleasure neither of these belongs: for though one may have got quickly
into the state Pleasure, as into that of anger, one cannot be in the
state quickly, nor relatively to the state of any other person; but we
can walk or grow, and so on, quickly or slowly.

Of course it is possible to change into the state of Pleasure quickly or
slowly, but to act in the state (by which, I mean, have the perception
of Pleasure) quickly, is not possible. And how can it be a Generation?
because, according to notions generally held, not _any_thing is
generated from _any_thing, but a thing resolves itself into that out
of which it was generated: whereas of that of which Pleasure is a
Generation Pain is a Destruction.

Again, they say that Pain is a lack of something suitable to nature and
Pleasure a supply of it.

But these are affections of the body: now if Pleasure really is a
supplying of somewhat suitable to nature, that must feel the Pleasure in
which the supply takes place, therefore the body of course: yet this
is not thought to be so: neither then is Pleasure a supplying, only a
person of course will be pleased when a supply takes place just as he
will be pained when he is cut.

This notion would seem to have arisen out of the Pains and Pleasures
connected with natural nourishment; because, when people have felt a
lack and so have had Pain first, they, of course, are pleased with the
supply of their lack.

But this is not the case with all Pleasures: those attendant on
mathematical studies, for instance, are unconnected with any Pain; and
of such as attend on the senses those which arise through the sense of
Smell; and again, many sounds, and sights, and memories, and hopes: now
of what can these be Generations? because there has been here no lack of
anything to be afterwards supplied.

And to those who bring forward disgraceful Pleasures we may reply that
these are not really pleasant things; for it does not follow because
they are pleasant to the ill-disposed that we are to admit that they are
pleasant except to them; just as we should not say that those things
are really wholesome, or sweet, or bitter, which are so to the sick,
or those objects really white which give that impression to people
labouring under ophthalmia.

Or we might say thus, that the Pleasures are choiceworthy but not as
derived from these sources: just as wealth is, but not as the price of
treason; or health, but not on the terms of eating anything however
loathsome. Or again, may we not say that Pleasures differ in kind? those
derived from honourable objects, for instance are different from those
arising from disgraceful ones; and it is not possible to experience
the Pleasure of the just man without being just, or of the musical man
without being musical; and so on of others.

The distinction commonly drawn between the friend and the flatterer
would seem to show clearly either that Pleasure is not a good, or that
there are different kinds of Pleasure: for the former is thought to have
good as the object of his intercourse, the latter Pleasure only; and
this last is reproached, but the former men praise as having different
objects in his intercourse.

[Sidenote: 1174a]

Again, no one would choose to live with a child's intellect all his
life through, though receiving the highest possible Pleasure from such
objects as children receive it from; or to take Pleasure in doing any of
the most disgraceful things, though sure never to be pained.

There are many things also about which we should be diligent even though
they brought no Pleasure; as seeing, remembering, knowing, possessing
the various Excellences; and the fact that Pleasures do follow on these
naturally makes no difference, because we should certainly choose them
even though no Pleasure resulted from them.

It seems then to be plain that Pleasure is not the Chief Good, nor is
every kind of it choiceworthy: and that there are some choiceworthy in
themselves, differing in kind, _i.e._ in the sources from which they
are derived. Let this then suffice by way of an account of the current
maxims respecting Pleasure and Pain.

[Sidenote: IV]

Now what it is, and how characterised, will be more plain if we take up
the subject afresh.

An act of Sight is thought to be complete at any moment; that is to say,
it lacks nothing the accession of which subsequently will complete its
whole nature.

Well, Pleasure resembles this: because it is a whole, as one may say;
and one could not at any moment of time take a Pleasure whose whole
nature would be completed by its lasting for a longer time. And for this
reason it is not a Movement: for all Movement takes place in time of
certain duration and has a certain End to accomplish; for instance, the
Movement of house-building is then only complete when the builder has
produced what he intended, that is, either in the whole time [necessary
to complete the whole design], or in a given portion. But all the
subordinate Movements are incomplete in the parts of the time, and are
different in kind from the whole movement and from one another (I
mean, for instance, that the fitting the stones together is a Movement
different from that of fluting the column, and both again from the
construction of the Temple as a whole: but this last is complete as
lacking nothing to the result proposed; whereas that of the basement,
or of the triglyph, is incomplete, because each is a Movement of a part
merely).

As I said then, they differ in kind, and you cannot at any time you
choose find a Movement complete in its whole nature, but, if at all, in
the whole time requisite.

[Sidenote: 1174_b_]

And so it is with the Movement of walking and all others: for, if motion
be a Movement from one place to another place, then of it too there are
different kinds, flying, walking, leaping, and such-like. And not only
so, but there are different kinds even in walking: the where-from and
where-to are not the same in the whole Course as in a portion of it;
nor in one portion as in another; nor is crossing this line the same as
crossing that: because a man is not merely crossing a line but a line in
a given place, and this is in a different place from that.

Of Movement I have discoursed exactly in another treatise. I will now
therefore only say that it seems not to be complete at any given moment;
and that most movements are incomplete and specifically different, since
the whence and whither constitute different species.

But of Pleasure the whole nature is complete at any given moment: it
is plain then that Pleasure and Movement must be different from one
another, and that Pleasure belongs to the class of things whole and
complete. And this might appear also from the impossibility of moving
except in a definite time, whereas there is none with respect to the
sensation of Pleasure, for what exists at the very present moment is a
kind of "whole."

From these considerations then it is plain that people are not warranted
in saying that Pleasure is a Movement or a Generation: because these
terms are not applicable to all things, only to such as are divisible
and not "wholes:" I mean that of an act of Sight there is no Generation,
nor is there of a point, nor of a monad, nor is any one of these a
Movement or a Generation: neither then of Pleasure is there Movement or
Generation, because it is, as one may say, "a whole."

Now since every Percipient Faculty works upon the Object answering to
it, and perfectly the Faculty in a good state upon the most excellent of
the Objects within its range (for Perfect Working is thought to be much
what I have described; and we will not raise any question about saying
"the Faculty" works, instead of, "that subject wherein the Faculty
resides"), in each case the best Working is that of the Faculty in its
best state upon the best of the Objects answering to it. And this will
be, further, most perfect and most pleasant: for Pleasure is attendant
upon every Percipient Faculty, and in like manner on every intellectual
operation and speculation; and that is most pleasant which is most
perfect, and that most perfect which is the Working of the best Faculty
upon the most excellent of the Objects within its range.

And Pleasure perfects the Working. But Pleasure does not perfect it in
the same way as the Faculty and Object of Perception do, being good;
just as health and the physician are not in similar senses causes of a
healthy state.

And that Pleasure does arise upon the exercise of every Percipient
Faculty is evident, for we commonly say that sights and sounds are
pleasant; it is plain also that this is especially the case when the
Faculty is most excellent and works upon a similar Object: and when both
the Object and Faculty of Perception are such, Pleasure will always
exist, supposing of course an agent and a patient.

[Sidenote: 1175_a_]

Furthermore, Pleasure perfects the act of Working not in the way of an
inherent state but as a supervening finish, such as is bloom in people
at their prime. Therefore so long as the Object of intellectual or
sensitive Perception is such as it should be and also the Faculty which
discerns or realises the Object, there will be Pleasure in the Working:
because when that which has the capacity of being acted on and that
which is apt to act are alike and similarly related, the same result
follows naturally.

How is it then that no one feels Pleasure continuously? is it not that
he wearies, because all human faculties are incapable of unintermitting
exertion; and so, of course, Pleasure does not arise either, because
that follows upon the act of Working. But there are some things which
please when new, but afterwards not in the like way, for exactly the
same reason: that at first the mind is roused and works on these Objects
with its powers at full tension; just as they who are gazing stedfastly
at anything; but afterwards the act of Working is not of the kind it was
at first, but careless, and so the Pleasure too is dulled.

Again, a person may conclude that all men grasp at Pleasure, because all
aim likewise at Life and Life is an act of Working, and every man works
at and with those things which also he best likes; the musical man, for
instance, works with his hearing at music; the studious man with his
intellect at speculative questions, and so forth. And Pleasure perfects
the acts of Working, and so Life after which men grasp. No wonder then
that they aim also at Pleasure, because to each it perfects Life, which
is itself choiceworthy. (We will take leave to omit the question whether
we choose Life for Pleasure's sake of Pleasure for Life's sake; because
these two plainly are closely connected and admit not of separation;
since Pleasure comes not into being without Working, and again, every
Working Pleasure perfects.)

And this is one reason why Pleasures are thought to differ in kind,
because we suppose that things which differ in kind must be perfected by
things so differing: it plainly being the case with the productions of
Nature and Art; as animals, and trees, and pictures, and statues, and
houses, and furniture; and so we suppose that in like manner acts of
Working which are different in kind are perfected by things differing in
kind. Now Intellectual Workings differ specifically from those of the
Senses, and these last from one another; therefore so do the Pleasures
which perfect them.

This may be shown also from the intimate connection subsisting between
each Pleasure and the Working which it perfects: I mean, that the
Pleasure proper to any Working increases that Working; for they who
work with Pleasure sift all things more closely and carry them out to a
greater degree of nicety; for instance, those men become geometricians
who take Pleasure in geometry, and they apprehend particular points more
completely: in like manner men who are fond of music, or architecture,
or anything else, improve each on his own pursuit, because they feel
Pleasure in them. Thus the Pleasures aid in increasing the Workings, and
things which do so aid are proper and peculiar: but the things which are
proper and peculiar to others specifically different are themselves also
specifically different.

Yet even more clearly may this be shown from the fact that the Pleasures
arising from one kind of Workings hinder other Workings; for instance,
people who are fond of flute-music cannot keep their attention to
conversation or discourse when they catch the sound of a flute; because
they take more Pleasure in flute-playing than in the Working they are
at the time engaged on; in other words, the Pleasure attendant on
flute-playing destroys the Working of conversation or discourse. Much
the same kind of thing takes place in other cases, when a person is
engaged in two different Workings at the same time: that is, the
pleasanter of the two keeps pushing out the other, and, if the disparity
in pleasantness be great, then more and more till a man even ceases
altogether to work at the other.

This is the reason why, when we are very much pleased with anything
whatever, we do nothing else, and it is only when we are but moderately
pleased with one occupation that we vary it with another: people,
for instance, who eat sweetmeats in the theatre do so most when the
performance is indifferent.

Since then the proper and peculiar Pleasure gives accuracy to the
Workings and makes them more enduring and better of their kind, while
those Pleasures which are foreign to them mar them, it is plain there
is a wide difference between them: in fact, Pleasures foreign to any
Working have pretty much the same effect as the Pains proper to it,
which, in fact, destroy the Workings; I mean, if one man dislikes
writing, or another calculation, the one does not write, the other does
not calculate; because, in each case, the Working is attended with some
Pain: so then contrary effects are produced upon the Workings by the
Pleasures and Pains proper to them, by which I mean those which arise
upon the Working, in itself, independently of any other circumstances.
As for the Pleasures foreign to a Working, we have said already that
they produce a similar effect to the Pain proper to it; that is they
destroy the Working, only not in like way.

Well then, as Workings differ from one another in goodness and badness,
some being fit objects of choice, others of avoidance, and others in
their nature indifferent, Pleasures are similarly related; since its own
proper Pleasure attends or each Working: of course that proper to a good
Working is good, that proper to a bad, bad: for even the desires for
what is noble are praiseworthy, and for what is base blameworthy.

Furthermore, the Pleasures attendant on Workings are more closely
connected with them even than the desires after them: for these last
are separate both in time and nature, but the former are close to the
Workings, and so indivisible from them as to raise a question whether
the Working and the Pleasure are identical; but Pleasure does not seem
to be an Intellectual Operation nor a Faculty of Perception, because
that is absurd; but yet it gives some the impression of being the same
from not being separated from these.

As then the Workings are different so are their Pleasures; now Sight
differs from Touch in purity, and Hearing and Smelling from Taste;
therefore, in like manner, do their Pleasures; and again, Intellectual
Pleasures from these Sensual, and the different kinds both of
Intellectual and Sensual from one another.

It is thought, moreover, that each animal has a Pleasure proper to
itself, as it has a proper Work; that Pleasure of course which is
attendant on the Working. And the soundness of this will appear upon
particular inspection: for horse, dog, and man have different Pleasures;
as Heraclitus says, an ass would sooner have hay than gold; in other
words, provender is pleasanter to asses than gold. So then the Pleasures
of animals specifically different are also specifically different, but
those of the same, we may reasonably suppose, are without difference.

Yet in the case of human creatures they differ not a little: for the
very same things please some and pain others: and what are painful and
hateful to some are pleasant to and liked by others. The same is the
case with sweet things: the same will not seem so to the man in a fever
as to him who is in health: nor will the invalid and the person in
robust health have the same notion of warmth. The same is the case with
other things also.

Now in all such cases that is held to _be_ which impresses the good man
with the notion of being such and such; and if this is a second maxim
(as it is usually held to be), and Virtue, that is, the Good man, in
that he is such, is the measure of everything, then those must be real
Pleasures which gave him the impression of being so and those things
pleasant in which he takes Pleasure. Nor is it at all astonishing that
what are to him unpleasant should give another person the impression of
being pleasant, for men are liable to many corruptions and marrings; and
the things in question are not pleasant really, only to these particular
persons, and to them only as being thus disposed.

Well of course, you may say, it is obvious that we must assert those
which are confessedly disgraceful to be real Pleasures, except to
depraved tastes: but of those which are thought to be good what kind,
or which, must we say is _The Pleasure of Man?_ is not the answer plain
from considering the Workings, because the Pleasures follow upon these?

Whether then there be one or several Workings which belong to the
perfect and blessed man, the Pleasures which perfect these Workings must
be said to be specially and properly _The Pleasures of Man;_ and all
the rest in a secondary sense, and in various degrees according as the
Workings are related to those highest and best ones.


VI

Now that we have spoken about the Excellences of both kinds, and
Friendship in its varieties, and Pleasures, it remains to sketch out
Happiness, since we assume that to be the one End of all human things:
and we shall save time and trouble by recapitulating what was stated
before.

[Sidenote: 1176b] Well then, we said that it is not a State merely;
because, if it were, it might belong to one who slept all his life
through and merely vegetated, or to one who fell into very great
calamities: and so, if these possibilities displease us and we would
rather put it into the rank of some kind of Working (as was also said
before), and Workings are of different kinds (some being necessary
and choiceworthy with a view to other things, while others are so in
themselves), it is plain we must rank Happiness among those choiceworthy
for their own sakes and not among those which are so with a view to
something further: because Happiness has no lack of anything but is
self-sufficient.

By choiceworthy in themselves are meant those from which nothing is
sought beyond the act of Working: and of this kind are thought to be the
actions according to Virtue, because doing what is noble and excellent
is one of those things which are choiceworthy for their own sake alone.

And again, such amusements as are pleasant; because people do not choose
them with any further purpose: in fact they receive more harm than
profit from them, neglecting their persons and their property. Still the
common run of those who are judged happy take refuge in such pastimes,
which is the reason why they who have varied talent in such are highly
esteemed among despots; because they make themselves pleasant in those
things which these aim at, and these accordingly want such men.

Now these things are thought to be appurtenances of Happiness because
men in power spend their leisure herein: yet, it may be, we cannot
argue from the example of such men: because there is neither Virtue nor
Intellect necessarily involved in having power, and yet these are the
only sources of good Workings: nor does it follow that because these
men, never having tasted pure and generous Pleasure, take refuge in
bodily ones, we are therefore to believe them to be more choiceworthy:
for children too believe that those things are most excellent which are
precious in their eyes.

We may well believe that as children and men have different ideas as to
what is precious so too have the bad and the good: therefore, as we have
many times said, those things are really precious and pleasant which
seem so to the good man: and as to each individual that Working is most
choiceworthy which is in accordance with his own state to the good man
that is so which is in accordance with Virtue.

Happiness then stands not in amusement; in fact the very notion is
absurd of the End being amusement, and of one's toiling and enduring
hardness all one's life long with a view to amusement: for everything in
the world, so to speak, we choose with some further End in view, except
Happiness, for that is the End comprehending all others. Now to take
pains and to labour with a view to amusement is plainly foolish and
very childish: but to amuse one's self with a view to steady employment
afterwards, as Anacharsis says, is thought to be right: for amusement is
like rest, and men want rest because unable to labour continuously.

Rest, therefore, is not an End, because it is adopted with a view to
Working afterwards.

[Sidenote: 1177a] Again, it is held that the Happy Life must be one in
the way of Excellence, and this is accompanied by earnestness and stands
not in amusement. Moreover those things which are done in earnest, we
say, are better than things merely ludicrous and joined with amusement:
and we say that the Working of the better part, or the better man, is
more earnest; and the Working of the better is at once better and more
capable of Happiness.

Then, again, as for bodily Pleasures, any ordinary person, or even
a slave, might enjoy them, just as well as the best man living but
Happiness no one supposes a slave to share except so far as it is
implied in life: because Happiness stands not in such pastimes but in
the Workings in the way of Excellence, as has also been stated before.


VII

Now if Happiness is a Working in the way of Excellence of course that
Excellence must be the highest, that is to say, the Excellence of the
best Principle. Whether then this best Principle is Intellect or some
other which is thought naturally to rule and to lead and to conceive of
noble and divine things, whether being in its own nature divine or the
most divine of all our internal Principles, the Working of this in
accordance with its own proper Excellence must be the perfect Happiness.

That it is Contemplative has been already stated: and this would seem to
be consistent with what we said before and with truth: for, in the first
place, this Working is of the highest kind, since the Intellect is the
highest of our internal Principles and the subjects with which it
is conversant the highest of all which fall within the range of our
knowledge.

Next, it is also most Continuous: for we are better able to contemplate
than to do anything else whatever, continuously.

Again, we think Pleasure must be in some way an ingredient in Happiness,
and of all Workings in accordance with Excellence that in the way of
Science is confessedly most pleasant: at least the pursuit of Science is
thought to contain Pleasures admirable for purity and permanence; and it
is reasonable to suppose that the employment is more pleasant to those
who have mastered, than to those who are yet seeking for, it.

And the Self-Sufficiency which people speak of will attach chiefly to
the Contemplative Working: of course the actual necessaries of life are
needed alike by the man of science, and the just man, and all the other
characters; but, supposing all sufficiently supplied with these, the
just man needs people towards whom, and in concert with whom, to
practise his justice; and in like manner the man of perfected
self-mastery, and the brave man, and so on of the rest; whereas the man
of science can contemplate and speculate even when quite alone, and the
more entirely he deserves the appellation the more able is he to do so:
it may be he can do better for having fellow-workers but still he is
certainly most Self-Sufficient.

[Sidenote: 1177b] Again, this alone would seem to be rested in for
its own sake, since nothing results from it beyond the fact of having
contemplated; whereas from all things which are objects of moral action
we do mean to get something beside the doing them, be the same more or
less.

Also, Happiness is thought to stand in perfect rest; for we toil that we
may rest, and war that we may be at peace. Now all the Practical Virtues
require either society or war for their Working, and the actions
regarding these are thought to exclude rest; those of war entirely,
because no one chooses war, nor prepares for war, for war's sake: he
would indeed be thought a bloodthirsty villain who should make enemies
of his friends to secure the existence of fighting and bloodshed. The
Working also of the statesman excludes the idea of rest, and, beside the
actual work of government, seeks for power and dignities or at least
Happiness for the man himself and his fellow-citizens: a Happiness
distinct the national Happiness which we evidently seek as being
different and distinct.

If then of all the actions in accordance with the various virtues those
of policy and war are pre-eminent in honour and greatness, and these are
restless, and aim at some further End and are not choiceworthy for
their own sakes, but the Working of the Intellect, being apt for
contemplation, is thought to excel in earnestness, and to aim at no End
beyond itself and to have Pleasure of its own which helps to increase
the Working, and if the attributes of Self-Sufficiency, and capacity of
rest, and unweariedness (as far as is compatible with the infirmity
of human nature), and all other attributes of the highest Happiness,
plainly belong to this Working, this must be perfect Happiness, if
attaining a complete duration of life, which condition is added because
none of the points of Happiness is incomplete.

But such a life will be higher than mere human nature, because a man
will live thus, not in so far as he is man but in so far as there is in
him a divine Principle: and in proportion as this Principle excels
his composite nature so far does the Working thereof excel that in
accordance with any other kind of Excellence: and therefore, if pure
Intellect, as compared with human nature, is divine, so too will the
life in accordance with it be divine compared with man's ordinary life.
[Sidenote: 1178a] Yet must we not give ear to those who bid one as man
to mind only man's affairs, or as mortal only mortal things; but, so far
as we can, make ourselves like immortals and do all with a view to
living in accordance with the highest Principle in us, for small as it
may be in bulk yet in power and preciousness it far more excels all the
others.

In fact this Principle would seem to constitute each man's "Self," since
it is supreme and above all others in goodness it _would_ be absurd then
for a man not to choose his own life but that of some other.

And here will apply an observation made before, that whatever is proper
to each is naturally best and pleasantest to him: such then is to Man
the life in accordance with pure Intellect (since this Principle is most
truly Man), and if so, then it is also the happiest.


VIII

And second in degree of Happiness will be that Life which is in
accordance with the other kind of Excellence, for the Workings in
accordance with this are proper to Man: I mean, we do actions of
justice, courage, and the other virtues, towards one another, in
contracts, services of different kinds, and in all kinds of actions and
feelings too, by observing what is befitting for each: and all these
plainly are proper to man. Further, the Excellence of the Moral
character is thought to result in some points from physical
circumstances, and to be, in many, very closely connected with the
passions.

Again, Practical Wisdom and Excellence of the Moral character are
very closely united; since the Principles of Practical Wisdom are in
accordance with the Moral Virtues and these are right when they accord
with Practical Wisdom.

These moreover, as bound up with the passions, must belong to the
composite nature, and the Excellences or Virtues of the composite nature
are proper to man: therefore so too will be the life and Happiness which
is in accordance with them. But that of the Pure Intellect is separate
and distinct: and let this suffice upon the subject, since great
exactness is beyond our purpose,

It would seem, moreover, to require supply of external goods to a small
degree, or certainly less than the Moral Happiness: for, as far as
necessaries of life are concerned, we will suppose both characters to
need them equally (though, in point of fact, the man who lives in
society does take more pains about his person and all that kind of
thing; there will really be some little difference), but when we come to
consider their Workings there will be found a great difference.

I mean, the liberal man must have money to do his liberal actions with,
and the just man to meet his engagements (for mere intentions
are uncertain, and even those who are unjust make a pretence of
_wishing_ to do justly), and the brave man must have power, if
he is to perform any of the actions which appertain to his particular
Virtue, and the man of perfected self-mastery must have opportunity of
temptation, else how shall he or any of the others display his real
character?

[Sidenote: 1178b]

(By the way, a question is sometimes raised, whether the moral choice or
the actions have most to do with Virtue, since it consists in both: it
is plain that the perfection of virtuous action requires both: but for
the actions many things are required, and the greater and more numerous
they are the more.) But as for the man engaged in Contemplative
Speculation, not only are such things unnecessary for his Working, but,
so to speak, they are even hindrances: as regards the Contemplation at
least; because of course in so far as he is Man and lives in society he
chooses to do what Virtue requires, and so he will need such things
for maintaining his character as Man though not as a speculative
philosopher.

And that the perfect Happiness must be a kind of Contemplative Working
may appear also from the following consideration: our conception of the
gods is that they are above all blessed and happy: now what kind of
Moral actions are we to attribute to them? those of justice? nay,
will they not be set in a ridiculous light if represented as forming
contracts, and restoring deposits, and so on? well then, shall we
picture them performing brave actions, withstanding objects of fear and
meeting dangers, because it is noble to do so? or liberal ones? but to
whom shall they be giving? and further, it is absurd to think they have
money or anything of the kind. And as for actions of perfected
self-mastery, what can theirs be? would it not be a degrading praise
that they have no bad desires? In short, if one followed the subject
into all details all the circumstances connected with Moral actions
would appear trivial and unworthy of gods.

Still, every one believes that they live, and therefore that they
Work because it is not supposed that they sleep their time away like
Endymion: now if from a living being you take away Action, still more
if Creation, what remains but Contemplation? So then the Working of
the Gods, eminent in blessedness, will be one apt for Contemplative
Speculation; and of all human Workings that will have the greatest
capacity for Happiness which is nearest akin to this.

A corroboration of which position is the fact that the other animals
do not partake of Happiness, being completely shut out from any such
Working.

To the gods then all their life is blessed; and to men in so far as
there is in it some copy of such Working, but of the other animals none
is happy because it in no way shares in Contemplative Speculation.

Happiness then is co-extensive with this Contemplative Speculation, and
in proportion as people have the act of Contemplation so far have they
also the being happy, not incidentally, but in the way of Contemplative
Speculation because it is in itself precious.

So Happiness must be a kind of Contemplative Speculation; but since it
is Man we are speaking of he will need likewise External Prosperity,
because his Nature is not by itself sufficient for Speculation, but
there must be health of body, and nourishment, and tendance of all
kinds.

[Sidenote: 1179a] However, it must not be thought, because without
external goods a man cannot enjoy high Happiness, that therefore he
will require many and great goods in order to be happy: for neither
Self-sufficiency, nor Action, stand in Excess, and it is quite possible
to act nobly without being ruler of sea and land, since even with
moderate means a man may act in accordance with Virtue.

And this may be clearly seen in that men in private stations are thought
to act justly, not merely no less than men in power but even more: it
will be quite enough that just so much should belong to a man as is
necessary, for his life will be happy who works in accordance with
Virtue.

Solon perhaps drew a fair picture of the Happy, when he said that they
are men moderately supplied with external goods, and who have achieved
the most noble deeds, as he thought, and who have lived with perfect
self-mastery: for it is quite possible for men of moderate means to act
as they ought.

Anaxagoras also seems to have conceived of the Happy man not as either
rich or powerful, saying that he should not wonder if he were accounted
a strange man in the judgment of the multitude: for they judge by
outward circumstances of which alone they have any perception.

And thus the opinions of the Wise seem to be accordant with our account
of the matter: of course such things carry some weight, but truth, in
matters of moral action, is judged from facts and from actual life,
for herein rests the decision. So what we should do is to examine the
preceding statements by referring them to facts and to actual life, and
when they harmonise with facts we may accept them, when they are at
variance with them conceive of them as mere theories.

Now he that works in accordance with, and pays observance to, Pure
Intellect, and tends this, seems likely to be both in the best frame of
mind and dearest to the Gods: because if, as is thought, any care is
bestowed on human things by the Gods then it must be reasonable to think
that they take pleasure in what is best and most akin to themselves (and
this must be the Pure Intellect); and that they requite with kindness
those who love and honour this most, as paying observance to what is
dear to them, and as acting rightly and nobly. And it is quite obvious
that the man of Science chiefly combines all these: he is therefore
dearest to the Gods, and it is probable that he is at the same time most
Happy.

Thus then on this view also the man of Science will be most Happy.



IX

Now then that we have said enough in our sketchy kind of way
on these subjects; I mean, on the Virtues, and also on Friendship and
Pleasure; are we to suppose that our original purpose is completed? Must
we not rather acknowledge, what is commonly said, that in matters of
moral action mere Speculation and Knowledge is not the real End but
rather Practice: and if so, then neither in respect of Virtue is
Knowledge enough; we must further strive to have and exert it, and take
whatever other means there are of becoming good.

Now if talking and writing were of themselves sufficient to make men
good, they would justly, as Theognis observes have reaped numerous and
great rewards, and the thing to do would be to provide them: but in
point of fact, while they plainly have the power to guide and stimulate
the generous among the young and to base upon true virtuous principle
any noble and truly high-minded disposition, they as plainly are
powerless to guide the mass of men to Virtue and goodness; because it is
not their nature to be amenable to a sense of shame but only to fear;
nor to abstain from what is low and mean because it is disgraceful to do
it but because of the punishment attached to it: in fact, as they live
at the beck and call of passion, they pursue their own proper pleasures
and the means of securing them, and they avoid the contrary pains; but
as for what is noble and truly pleasurable they have not an idea of it,
inasmuch as they have never tasted of it.

Men such as these then what mere words can transform? No, indeed! it is
either actually impossible, or a task of no mean difficulty, to alter by
words what has been of old taken into men's very dispositions: and,
it may be, it is a ground for contentment if with all the means and
appliances for goodness in our hands we can attain to Virtue.

The formation of a virtuous character some ascribe to Nature, some to
Custom, and some to Teaching. Now Nature's part, be it what it may,
obviously does not rest with us, but belongs to those who in the truest
sense are fortunate, by reason of certain divine agency,

Then, as for Words and Precept, they, it is to be feared, will not avail
with all; but it may be necessary for the mind of the disciple to have
been previously prepared for liking and disliking as he ought; just as
the soil must, to nourish the seed sown. For he that lives in obedience
to passion cannot hear any advice that would dissuade him, nor, if he
heard, understand: now him that is thus how can one reform? in fact,
generally, passion is not thought to yield to Reason but to brute force.
So then there must be, to begin with, a kind of affinity to Virtue in
the disposition; which must cleave to what is honourable and loath
what is disgraceful. But to get right guidance towards Virtue from the
earliest youth is not easy unless one is brought up under laws of such
kind; because living with self-mastery and endurance is not pleasant to
the mass of men, and specially not to the young. For this reason the
food, and manner of living generally, ought to be the subject of
legal regulation, because things when become habitual will not be
disagreeable.

[Sidenote: 1180_a_] Yet perhaps it is not sufficient that men while
young should get right food and tendance, but, inasmuch as they will
have to practise and become accustomed to certain things even after they
have attained to man's estate, we shall want laws on these points as
well, and, in fine, respecting one's whole life, since the mass of men
are amenable to compulsion rather than Reason, and to punishment rather
than to a sense of honour.

And therefore some men hold that while lawgivers should employ the sense
of honour to exhort and guide men to Virtue, under the notion that they
will then obey who have been well trained in habits; they should
impose chastisement and penalties on those who disobey and are of less
promising nature; and the incurable expel entirely: because the good man
and he who lives under a sense of honour will be obedient to reason;
and the baser sort, who grasp at pleasure, will be kept in check, like
beasts of burthen by pain. Therefore also they say that the pains should
be such as are most contrary to the pleasures which are liked.

As has been said already, he who is to be good must have been brought up
and habituated well, and then live accordingly under good institutions,
and never do what is low and mean, either against or with his will. Now
these objects can be attained only by men living in accordance with some
guiding Intellect and right order, with power to back them.

As for the Paternal Rule, it possesses neither strength nor compulsory
power, nor in fact does the Rule of any one man, unless he is a king or
some one in like case: but the Law has power to compel, since it is a
declaration emanating from Practical Wisdom and Intellect. And people
feel enmity towards their fellow-men who oppose their impulses, however
rightly they may do so: the Law, on the contrary, is not the object of
hatred, though enforcing right rules.

The Laced\E6monian is nearly the only State in which the framer of the
Constitution has made any provision, it would seem, respecting the food
and manner of living of the people: in most States these points are
entirely neglected, and each man lives just as he likes, ruling his wife
and children Cyclops-Fashion.

Of course, the best thing would be that there should be a right Public
System and that we should be able to carry it out: but, since as a
public matter those points are neglected, the duty would seem to devolve
upon each individual to contribute to the cause of Virtue with his own
children and friends, or at least to make this his aim and purpose: and
this, it would seem, from what has been said, he will be best able to do
by making a Legislator of himself: since all public *[Sidenote: 1180_b_]
systems, it is plain, are formed by the instrumentality of laws and
those are good which are formed by that of good laws: whether they are
written or unwritten, whether they are applied to the training of one or
many, will not, it seems, make any difference, just as it does not in
music, gymnastics, or any other such accomplishments, which are gained
by practice.

For just as in Communities laws and customs prevail, so too in families
the express commands of the Head, and customs also: and even more in the
latter, because of blood-relationship and the benefits conferred:
for there you have, to begin with, people who have affection and are
naturally obedient to the authority which controls them.

Then, furthermore, Private training has advantages over Public, as in
the case of the healing art: for instance, as a general rule, a man who
is in a fever should keep quiet, and starve; but in a particular case,
perhaps, this may not hold good; or, to take a different illustration,
the boxer will not use the same way of fighting with all antagonists.

It would seem then that the individual will be most exactly attended to
under Private care, because so each will be more likely to obtain what
is expedient for him. Of course, whether in the art of healing, or
gymnastics, or any other, a man will treat individual cases the better
for being acquainted with general rules; as, "that so and so is good for
all, or for men in such and such cases:" because general maxims are not
only said to be but are the object-matter of sciences: still this is no
reason against the possibility of a man's taking excellent care of
some _one_ case, though he possesses no scientific knowledge but from
experience is exactly acquainted with what happens in each point; just
as some people are thought to doctor themselves best though they would
be wholly unable to administer relief to others. Yet it may seem to be
necessary nevertheless, for one who wishes to become a real artist and
well acquainted with the theory of his profession, to have recourse
to general principles and ascertain all their capacities: for we have
already stated that these are the object-matter of sciences.

If then it appears that we may become good through the instrumentality
of laws, of course whoso wishes to make men better by a system of care
and training must try to make a Legislator of himself; for to treat
skilfully just any one who may be put before you is not what any
ordinary person can do, but, if any one, he who has knowledge; as in the
healing art, and all others which involve careful practice and skill.

[Sidenote: 1181_a_] Will not then our next business be to inquire from
what sources, or how one may acquire this faculty of Legislation; or
shall we say, that, as in similar cases, Statesmen are the people to
learn from, since this faculty was thought to be a part of the Social
Science? Must we not admit that the Political Science plainly does not
stand on a similar footing to that of other sciences and faculties? I
mean, that while in all other cases those who impart the faculties
and themselves exert them are identical (physicians and painters for
instance) matters of Statesmanship the Sophists profess to teach, but
not one of them practises it, that being left to those actually engaged
in it: and these might really very well be thought to do it by some
singular knack and by mere practice rather than by any intellectual
process: for they neither write nor speak on these matters (though it
might be more to their credit than composing speeches for the courts or
the assembly), nor again have they made Statesmen of their own sons or
their friends.

One can hardly suppose but that they would have done so if they could,
seeing that they could have bequeathed no more precious legacy to their
communities, nor would they have preferred, for themselves or their
dearest friends, the possession of any faculty rather than this.

Practice, however, seems to contribute no little to its acquisition;
merely breathing the atmosphere of politics would never have made
Statesmen of them, and therefore we may conclude that they who would
acquire a knowledge of Statesmanship must have in addition practice.

But of the Sophists they who profess to teach it are plainly a long way
off from doing so: in fact, they have no knowledge at all of its nature
and objects; if they had, they would never have put it on the same
footing with Rhetoric or even on a lower: neither would they have
conceived it to be "an easy matter to legislate by simply collecting
such laws as are famous because of course one could select the best," as
though the selection were not a matter of skill, and the judging aright
a very great matter, as in Music: for they alone, who have practical
knowledge of a thing, can judge the performances rightly or understand
with what means and in what way they are accomplished, and what
harmonises with what: the unlearned must be content with being able to
discover whether the result is good or bad, as in painting.

[Sidenote: 1181_b_] Now laws may be called the performances or tangible
results of Political Science; how then can a man acquire from these
the faculty of Legislation, or choose the best? we do not see men made
physicians by compilations: and yet in these treatises men endeavour to
give not only the cases but also how they may be cured, and the proper
treatment in each case, dividing the various bodily habits. Well, these
are thought to be useful to professional men, but to the unprofessional
useless. In like manner it may be that collections of laws and
Constitutions would be exceedingly useful to such as are able to
speculate on them, and judge what is well, and what ill, and what
kind of things fit in with what others: but they who without this
qualification should go through such matters cannot have right judgment,
unless they have it by instinct, though they may become more intelligent
in such matters.

Since then those who have preceded us have left uninvestigated the
subject of Legislation, it will be better perhaps for us to investigate
it ourselves, and, in fact, the whole subject of Polity, that thus what
we may call Human Philosophy may be completed as far as in us lies.

First then, let us endeavour to get whatever fragments of good there may
be in the statements of our predecessors, next, from the Polities we
have collected, ascertain what kind of things preserve or destroy
Communities, and what, particular Constitutions; and the cause why some
are well and others ill managed, for after such inquiry, we shall be the
better able to take a concentrated view as to what kind of Constitution
is best, what kind of regulations are best for each, and what laws and
customs.

To this let us now proceed.



NOTES


P 2, l. 16. For this term, as here employed, our language contains no
equivalent expression except an inconvenient paraphrase.

There are three senses which it bears in this treatise: the first (in
which it is here employed) is its strict etymological signfication "The
science of Society," and this includes everything which can bear at
all upon the well-being of Man in his social capacity, "Quicquid agunt
homines nostri est farrago libelli." It is in this view that it is
fairly denominated most commanding and inclusive.

The second sense (in which it occurs next, just below) is "Moral
Philosophy." Aristotle explains the term in this sense in the
Rhetoric (1 2) [Greek: hae peri ta aethae pragmateia aen dikaion esti
prosagoreuen politikaen]. He has principally in view in this treatise
the moral training of the Individual, the branch of the Science of
Society which we call Ethics Proper, bearing the same relation to the
larger Science as the hewing and squaring of the stones to the building
of the Temple, or the drill of the Recruit to the manoeuvres of the
field. Greek Philosophy viewed men principally as constituent parts of
a [Greek: polis], considering this function to be the real End of each,
and this state as that in which the Individual attained his highest and
most complete development.

The third sense is "The detail of Civil Government," which Aristotle
expressly states (vi. 8) was the most common acceptation of the term.

P 3, l. 23. Matters of which a man is to judge either belong to some
definite art or science, or they do not. In the former case he is the
best judge who has thorough acquaintance with that art or science, in
the latter, the man whose powers have been developed and matured by
education. A lame horse one would show to a farmer, not to the best and
wisest man of one's acquaintance; to the latter, one would apply in a
difficult case of conduct.

Experience answers to the first, a state of self-control to the latter.

P 3, l. 35. In the last chapter of the third book of this treatise it is
said of the fool, that his desire of pleasure is not only insatiable,
but indiscriminate in its objects, [Greek: pantachothen].

P 4, l. 30. [Greek: 'Archae] is a word used in this treatise in various
significations. The primary one is "beginning or first cause," and this
runs through all its various uses.

"Rule," and sometimes "Rulers," are denoted by this term the initiative
being a property of Rule.

"Principle" is a very usual signification of it, and in fact the most
characteristic of the Ethics. The word Principle means "starting-point."
Every action has two beginnings, that of Resolve ([Greek: ou eneka]), and
that of Action ([Greek: othen ae kenaesis]). I desire praise of men this
then is the beginning of Resolve. Having considered how it is to be
attained, I resolve upon some course and this Resolve is the beginning
of Action.

The beginnings of Resolve, '[Greek: Archai] or Motives, when formally
stated, are the major premisses of what Aristotle calls the [Greek:
sullagismoi ton prakton], i.e. the reasoning into which actions may be
analysed.

Thus we say that the desire of human praise was the motive of the
Pharisees, or the principle on which they acted.

Their practical syllogism then would stand thus:

  Whatever gains human praise is to be done;
  Public praying and almsgiving gave human praise:
  [ergo] Public praying and almsgiving are to be done.

The major premisses may be stored up in the mind as rules of action, and
this is what is commonly meant by having principles good or bad.

P. 5, l 1. The difficulty of this passage consists in determining the
signification of the terms [Greek: gnorima aemin] and [Greek: gnorima
aplos]

I have translated them without reference to their use elsewhere, as
denoting respectively what _is_ and what _may_ be known. All truth
is [Greek: gnorimon aplos], but that alone [Greek: aemin] which we
individually realise, therefore those principles alone are [Greek:
gnorima aemin] which _we have received as true_. From this appears
immediately the necessity of good training as preparatory to the study
of Moral Philosophy for good training in habits will either work
principles into our nature, or make us capable of accepting them as soon
as they are put before us; which no mere intellectual training can do.
The child who has been used to obey his parents may never have heard the
fifth Commandment but it is in the very texture of his nature, and the
first time he hears it he will recognise it as morally true and right
the principle is in his case a fact, the reason for which he is as
little inclined to ask as any one would be able to prove its truth if he
should ask.

But these terms are employed elsewhere (Analytica Post I cap. 11. sect.
10) to denote respectively particulars and universals The latter are so
denominated, because principles or laws must be supposed to have existed
before the instances of their operation. Justice must have existed
before just actions, Redness before red things, but since what we meet
with are the concrete instances (from which we gather the principles and
laws), the particulars are said to be [Greek: gnorimotera aemin]

Adopting this signification gives greater unity to the whole passage,
which will then stand thus. The question being whether we are to assume
principles, or obtain them by an analysis of facts, Aristotle says,
"We must begin of course with what is known but then this term denotes
either particulars or universals perhaps we then must begin with
particulars and hence the necessity of a previous good training in
habits, etc. (which of course is beginning with particular facts), for a
fact is a starting point, and if this be sufficiently clear, there will
be no want of the reason for the fact in addition"

The objection to this method of translation is, that [Greek: archai]
occurs immediately afterwards in the sense of "principles."

  Utere tuo judicio nihil enim impedio.

P 6, l. 1. Or "prove themselves good," as in the Prior Analytics, ii 25,
[Greek: apanta pisteuomen k.t l] but the other rendering is supported
by a passage in Book VIII. chap. ix. [Greek: oi d' upo ton epieikon kai
eidoton oregomenoi timaes bebaiosai ten oikeian doxan ephientai peri
auton chairousi de oti eisin agathoi, pisteuontes te ton legonton
krisei]

P 6, l. 11. [Greek: thesis] meant originally some paradoxical statement
by any philosopher of name enough to venture on one, but had come to
mean any dialectical question. Topics, I. chap. ix.

P 6, l. 13. A lost work, supposed to have been so called, because
containing miscellaneous questions.

P 6, l. 15. It is only quite at the close of the treatise that Aristotle
refers to this, and allows that [Greek: theoria] constitutes the highest
happiness because it is the exercise of the highest faculty in man the
reason of thus deferring the statement being that till the lower, that
is the moral, nature has been reduced to perfect order, [Greek: theoria]
cannot have place, though, had it been held out from the first, men
would have been for making the experiment at once, without the trouble
of self-discipline.

P 6, l. 22. Or, as some think, "many theories have been founded on
them."

P. 8, l. 1. The list ran thus--

  [Greek:
  to peras     to apeiron      |    to euthu
  to perisson  to artion       |    to phos
  to en        to plethos      |    to tetragonon
  to dexion    to aristeron    |    to aeremoun
  to arren     to thelu        |    to agathon
  ]

P 8, l. 2. Plato's sister's son.

P 9, l. 9. This is the capital defect in Aristotle's eyes, who being
eminently practical, could not like a theory which not only did not
necessarily lead to action, but had a tendency to discourage it by
enabling unreal men to talk finely. If true, the theory is merely a way
of stating facts, and leads to no action.

P. 10, l. 34. _i.e._ the identification of Happiness with the Chief
Good.

P. 11, l. 11. _i.e._ without the capability of addition.

P. 11, l. 14. And then Happiness would at once be shown not to be the
Chief Good. It is a contradiction in terms to speak of adding to the
Chief Good. See Book X. chap. 11. [Greek: delon os oud allo ouden
tagathon an eiae o meta tenos ton kath' auto agathon airetoteron
ginetai.]

P. 12, l. 9. _i.e._ as working or as quiescent.

P. 13, 1. 14. This principle is more fully stated, with illustrations,
in the Topics, I. chap. ix.

P. 13, l. 19. Either that of the bodily senses, or that of the moral
senses. "Fire burns," is an instance of the former, "Treason is odious,"
of the latter.

P. 14, l. 27. I have thought it worthwhile to vary the interpretation of
this word, because though "habitus" may be equivalent to all the senses
of [Greek: exis], "habit" is not, at least according to our colloquial
usage we commonly denote by "habit" a state formed by habituation.

P. 14, l. 35. Another and perhaps more obvious method of rendering this
passage is to apply [Greek: kalon kagathon] to things, and let them
depend grammatically on [Greek: epaeboli]. It is to be remembered,
however, that [Greek: kalos kagathos] bore a special and well-known
meaning also the comparison is in the text more complete, and the point
of the passage seems more completely brought out.

P. 15 l. 16. "Goodness always implies the love of itself, an affection
to goodness." (Bishop Butler, Sermon xiii ) Aristotle describes pleasure
in the Tenth Book of this Treatise as the result of any faculty of
perception meeting with the corresponding object, vicious pleasure being
as truly pleasure as the most refined and exalted. If Goodness then
implies the love of itself, the percipient will always have its object
present, and pleasure continually result.

P. 15, l. 32. In spite of theory, we know as a matter of fact that
external circumstances are necessary to complete the idea of Happiness
not that Happiness is capable of addition, but that when we assert it to
be identical with virtuous action we must understand that it is to have
a fair field; in fact, the other side of [Greek: bios teleios].

P. 16, l. 18. It is remarkable how Aristotle here again shelves what he
considers an unpractical question. If Happiness were really a direct
gift from Heaven, independently of human conduct, all motive to
self-discipline and moral improvement would vanish He shows therefore
that it is no depreciation of the value of Happiness to suppose it to
come partly at least from ourselves, and he then goes on with other
reasons why we should think with him.

P. 16, l. 26. This term is important, what has been maimed was once
perfect; he does not contemplate as possible the case of a man being
born incapable of virtue, and so of happiness.

P. 17, l. 3. But why give materials and instruments, if there is no work
to do?

P. 18, l. 6. The supposed pair of ancestors.

P. 18, l. 12. Solon says, "Call no man happy till he is dead." He must
mean either, The man when dead _is_ happy (a), or, The man when dead
_may be said to have been happy_ (b). If the former, does he mean
positive happiness (a)? or only freedom from unhappiness ([Greek: B])?
_We_ cannot allow (a), Men's opinions disallow ([Greek: B]), We revert
now to the consideration of (b).

P. 18, l. 36. The difficulty was raised by the clashing of a notion
commonly held, and a fact universally experienced. Most people conceive
that Happiness should be abiding, every one knows that fortune is
changeable. It is the notion which supports the definition, because we
have therein based Happiness on the most abiding cause.

P. 20, l. 12. The term seems to be employed advisedly. The Choragus, of
course, dressed his actors _for their parts;_ not according to their
fancies or his own.

Hooker has (E. P. v. ixxvi. 5) a passage which seems to be an admirable
paraphrase on this.

"Again, that the measure of our outward prosperity be taken by
proportion with that which every man's estate in this present life
requireth. External abilities are instruments of action. It contenteth
wise artificers to have their instruments proportionable to their work,
rather fit for use than huge and goodly to please the eye. Seeing then
the actions of a servant do not need that which may be necessary for men
of calling and place in the world, neither men of inferior condition
many things which greater personages can hardly want; surely they are
blessed in worldly respects who have wherewith to perform what their
station and place asketh, though they have no more."

P. 20, l. 18. Always bearing in mind that man "never continueth in one
stay."

P. 20, l. 11. The meaning is this: personal fortunes, we have said, must
be in certain weight and number to affect our own happiness, this will
be true, of course, of those which are reflected on us from our friends:
and these are the only ones to which the dead are supposed to be
liable? add then the difference of sensibility which it is fair to
presume, and there is a very small residuum of joy or sorrow.

P. 21, l. 18. This is meant for an exhaustive division of goods, which
are either so _in esse_ or _in posse_.

If _in esse_, they are either above praise, or subjects of praise. Those
_in posse_, here called faculties, are good only when rightly used. Thus
Rhetoric is a faculty which may be used to promote justice or abused to
support villainy. Money in like way.

P. 22, l. 4. Eudoxus, a philosopher holding the doctrine afterwards
adopted by Epicurus respecting pleasure, but (as Aristotle testifies in
the Tenth Book) of irreproachable character.

P. 22, l. 13. See the Rhetoric, Book I. chap ix.

P. 24, l. 23. The unseen is at least as real as the seen.

P. 24, l. 29. The terms are borrowed from the Seventh Book and are here
used in their strict philosophical meaning. The [Greek: enkrates] is he
who has bad or unruly appetites, but whose reason is strong enough to
keep them under. The [Greek: akrates] is he whose appetites constantly
prevail over his reason and previous good resolutions.

By the law of habits the former is constantly approximating to a state
in which the appetites are wholly quelled. This state is called [Greek:
sophrosyne], and the man in it [Greek: sophron]. By the same law the
remonstrances of reason in the latter grow fainter and fainter till they
are silenced for ever. This state is called [Greek: akolasia], and the
man in it [Greek: akolastos].

P. 25, l. 2. This is untranslateable. As the Greek phrase, [Greek:
echein logon tinos], really denotes substituting that person's [Greek:
logos] for one's own, so the Irrational nature in a man of self-control
or perfected self-mastery substitutes the orders of Reason for its own
impulses. The other phrase means the actual possession of mathematical
truths as part of the mental furniture, _i.e._ knowing them.

P 25, l. 16. [Greek: xin] may be taken as opposed to [Greek: energeian],
and the meaning will be, to show a difference between Moral and
Intellectual Excellences, that men are commended for merely having the
latter, but only for exerting and using the former.

P. 26, l. 2. Which we call simply virtue.

P. 26, l. 4. For nature must of course supply the capacity.

P. 26, l. 18. Or "as a simple result of nature."

P. 28, l. 12. This is done in the Sixth Book.

P. 28, l. 21. It is, in truth, in the application of rules to particular
details of practice that our moral Responsibility chiefly lies no rule
can be so framed, that evasion shall be impossible. See Bishop Butler's
Sermon on the character of Balaam, and that on Self-Deceit. P. 29, l.
32. The words [Greek: akolastos] and [Greek: deilos] are not used here
in their strict significations to denote confirmed states of vice the
[Greek: enkrates] necessarily feels pain, because he must always be
thwarting passions which are a real part of his nature, though this pain
will grow less and less as he nears the point of [Greek: sophrosyne] or
perfected Self-Mastery, which being attained the pain will then, and
then only, cease entirely. So a certain degree of fear is necessary to
the _formation_ of true courage. All that is meant here is, that no
habit of courage or self-mastery can be said to be matured, until pain
altogether vanishes.

P. 30, l. 18. Virtue consists in the due regulation of _all_ the parts
of our nature our passions are a real part of that nature, and as
such have their proper office, it is an error then to aim at their
extirpation. It is true that in a perfect moral state emotion will be
rare, but then this will have been gained by regular process, being the
legitimate result of the law that "passive impressions weaken as active
habits are strengthened, by repetition." If musical instruments are
making discord, I may silence or I may bring them into harmony in
either case I get rid of discord, but in the latter I have the positive
enjoyment of music. The Stoics would have the passions rooted out,
Aristotle would have them cultivated to use an apt figure (whose I know
not), They would pluck the blossom off at once, he would leave it to
fall in due course when the fruit was formed. Of them we might truly
say, _Solitudinem faciunt, pacem appellant_. See on this point Bishop
Butler's fifth Sermon, and sect. 11. of the chapter on Moral Discipline
in the first part of his Analogy.

P. 32, l. 16. I have adopted this word from our old writers, because our
word _act_ is so commonly interchanged with _action_. [Greek: Praxis]
(action) properly denotes the whole process from the conception to the
performance. [Greek: Pragma] (fact) only the result. The latter may be
right when the former is wrong if, for example, a murderer was killed
by his accomplices. Again, the [Greek: praxis] may be _good_ though the
[Greek: pragma] be wrong, as if a man under erroneous impressions does
what would have been right if his impressions had been true (subject of
course to the question how far he is guiltless of his original error),
but in this case we could not call the [Greek: praxis] _right_. No
repetition of [Greek: pragmata] goes to form a habit. See Bishop Butler
on the Theory of Habits m the chapter on Moral Discipline, quoted above,
sect. 11. "And in like manner as habits belonging to the body," etc.

P. 32, l. 32. Being about to give a strict logical definition of Virtue,
Aristotle ascertains first what is its genus [Greek: ti estin].

P. 33, l. 15. That is, not for _merely having_ them, because we did not
make ourselves.

See Bishop Butler's account of our nature as containing "particular
propensions," in sect. iv. of the chapter on Moral discipline, and in
the Preface to the Sermons. P. 34, l. 14. This refers to the division of
quantity ([Greek: poson]) in the Categories. Those Quantities are called
by Aristotle Continuous whose parts have position relatively to one
another, as a line, surface, or solid, those discrete, whose parts
have no such relation, as numbers themselves, or any string of words
grammatically unconnected.

P. 34, l. 27. Numbers are in arithmetical proportion (more usually
called progression), when they increase or decrease by a common
difference thus, 2, 6, 10 are so, because 2 + 4 = 6, 6 + 4= 10, or _vice
versa_, 10 - 4 = 6, 6 - 4 = 2.

P. 36, l. 3. The two are necessary, because since the reason itself may
be perverted, a man must have recourse to an external standard; we may
suppose his [Greek: logos] originally to have been a sufficient guide,
but when he has injured his moral perceptions in any degree, he must go
out of himself for direction.

P. 37, l. 8. This is one of the many expressions which seem to imply
that this treatise is rather a collection of notes of a _viva voce_
lecture than a set formal treatise. "The table" of virtues and vices
probably was sketched out and exhibited to the audience.

P. 37,1. 23. Afterwards defined as "All things whose value is measured
by money"

P. 38, l. 8. We have no term exactly equivalent; it may be illustrated
by Horace's use of the term _hiatus_:

[Sidenote: A P 138] "Quid dignum tanto feret hic promissor hiatu?"
Opening the mouth wide gives a promise of something great to come,
if nothing great does come, this is a case of [Greek: chaunotes] or
fruitless and unmeaning _hiatus_; the transference to the present
subject is easy.

P. 38, l. 22. In like manner _we_ talk of laudable ambition, implying of
course there may be that which is not laudable.

P. 40, l. 3. An expression of Bishop Butler's, which corresponds exactly
to the definition of [Greek: nemesis] in the Rhetoric.

P. 41, l. 9. That is, in the same genus; to be contraries, things must
be generically connected: [Greek: ta pleiston allelon diestekota ton en
to auto genei enantia orizontai]. Categories, iv. 15.

P. 42, l. 22. "[Greek: Deuteros plous] is a proverb," says the Scholiast
on the Phaedo, "used of those who do anything safely and cautiously
inasmuch as they who have miscarried in their first voyage, set about
then: preparations for the second cautiously," and he then alludes to
this passage.

P. 42, l. 31. That is, you must allow for the _recoil_."Naturam expellas
furca tamen usque recurret."

P. 43, l. 2. This illustration sets in so clear a light the doctrines
entertained respectively by Aristotle, Eudoxus, and the Stoics regarding
pleasure, that it is worth while to go into it fully.

The reference is to Iliad iii. 154-160. The old counsellors, as Helen
comes upon the city wall, acknowledge her surpassing beauty, and have no
difficulty in understanding how both nations should have incurred such
suffering for her sake still, fair as she is, home she must go, that she
bring not ruin on themselves and their posterity.

This exactly represents Aristotle's relation to Pleasure he does not,
with Eudoxus and his followers, exalt it into the Summum Bonum (as Paris
would risk all for Helen), nor does he the the Stoics call it wholly
evil, as Hector might have said that the woes Helen had caused
had "banished all the beauty from her cheek," but, with the aged
counsellors, admits its charms, but aware of their dangerousness
resolves to deny himself, he "feels her sweetness, yet defies her
thrall."

P. 43, l. 20. [Greek: Aisthesis] is here used as an analogous noun, to
denote the faculty which, in respect of moral matters, discharges the
same function that bodily sense does in respect of physical objects. It
is worth while to notice how in our colloquial language we carry out the
same analogy. We say of a transaction, that it "looks ugly," "sounds
oddly," is a "nasty job," "stinks in our nostrils," is a "hard dealing."

P. 46, l. 16. A man is not responsible for being [Greek: theratos],
because "particular propensions, from their very nature, must be felt,
the objects of them being present, though they cannot be gratified
at all, or not with the allowance of the moral principle." But he is
responsible for being [Greek: eutheratos], because, though thus formed,
he "might have improved and raised himself to an higher and more secure
state of virtue by the contrary behaviour, by steadily following the
moral principle, supposed to be one part of his nature, and thus
withstanding that unavoidable danger of defection which necessarily
arose from propension, the other part of it. For by thus preserving his
integrity for some time, his danger would lessen, since propensions, by
being inured to submit, would do it more easily and of course and his
security against this lessening danger would increase, since the moral
principle would gain additional strength by exercise, both which things
are implied in the notion of virtuous habits." (From the chapter
on Moral Discipline m the Analogy, sect. iv.) The purpose of this
disquisition is to refute the Necessitarians; it is resumed in the third
chapter of this Book.

P. 47, l. 7. Virtue is not only the duty, but (by the laws of the Moral
Government of the World) also the interest of Man, or to express it in
Bishop Butler's manner, Conscience and Reasonable self-love are the two
principles in our nature which of right have supremacy over the rest,
and these two lead in point of fact the same course of action. (Sermon
II.)

P. 47, l. 7. Any ignorance of particular facts affects the rightness not
of the [Greek: praxis], but of the [Greek: pragma], but ignorance of
_i.e._ incapacity to discern, Principles, shows the Moral Constitution
to have been depraved, _i.e._ shows Conscience to be perverted, or the
sight of Self-love to be impaired.

P. 48, l. 18. [Greek: eneka] primarily denotes the relation of cause and
effect all circumstances which in any way contribute to a cert result
are [Greek: eneka] that result.

From the power which we have or acquire of deducing future results from
present causes we are enabled to act towards, with a view to produce,
these results thus [Greek: eneka] comes to mean not causation merely, but
_designed_ causation and so [Greek: on eneka] is used for Motive, or
final cause.

It is the primary meaning which is here intended, it would be a
contradiction in terms to speak of a man's being ignorant of his own
Motive of action.

When the man "drew a bow at a venture and smote the King of Israel
between the joints of the harnesss" (i Kings xxii 34) he did it [Greek:
eneka ton apdkteinai] the King of Israel, in the primary sense of
[Greek: eneka] that is to say, the King's death was _in fact the
result_, but could not have been the motive, of the shot, because the
King was disguised and the shot was at a venture.

P. 48, l. 22 Bishop Butler would agree to this he says of settled
deliberate anger, "It seems in us plainly connected with a sense of
virtue and vice, of moral good and evil." See the whole Sermon on
Resentment.

P. 48, l 23. Aristotle has, I venture to think, rather quibbled here,
by using [Greek: epithumia] and its verb, equivocally as there is no
following his argument without condescending to the same device, I have
used our word lust in its ancient signification Ps. xxiv. 12, "What man
is he that lusteth to live?"

P. 48, l 28. The meaning is, that the _onus probandi_ is thrown upon
the person who maintains the distinction, Aristotle has a _prima facie_
case. The whole passage is one of difficulty. Card wells text gives the
passage from [Greek: dokei de] as a separate argument Bekker's seems to
intend al 81 ir/jd\A3eis as a separate argument but if so, the argument
would be a mere _petitio principii_. I have adopted Cardwell's reading
in part, but retain the comma at [Greek: dmpho] and have translated the
last four words as applying to the whole discussion, whereas Cardwell's
reading seems to restrict them to the last argument.

P. 50, l ii. _i.e._ on objects of Moral Choice, opinion of this kind
is not the same as Moral Choice, because actions alone form habits and
constitute character, opinions are in general _signs_ of character, but
when they begin to be acted on they cease to be opinions, and merge in
Moral Choice.

  "Treason doth never prosper, what's the reason?
  When it doth prosper, none dare call it Treason."

P. 53, 1. 4. The introduction of the words [Greek: dia tinos] seems a
mere useless repetition, as in the second chapter [Greek: en tini] added
to [Greek: peri ti]. These I take for some among the many indications
that the treatise is a collection of notes for lectures, and not a
finished or systematic one.

P. 53, 1. 17. Suppose that three alternatives lay before a man, each of
the three is of course an object of Deliberation; when he has made his
choice, the alternative chosen does not cease to be in nature an object
of Deliberation, but superadds the character of being chosen and so
distinguished. Three men are admitted candidates for an office, the one
chosen is the successful candidate, so of the three [Greek: bouleuta],
the one chosen is the [Greek: bouleuton proaireton].

P. 53, 1. 22. Compare Bishop Butler's "System of Human Nature," in the
Preface to the Sermons.

P. 53, 1. 33. These words, [Greek: ek tou bouleusasthai--bouleusin],
contain the account of the whole mental machinery of any action.
The first step is a Wish, implied in the first here mentioned, viz.
Deliberation, for it has been already laid down that Deliberation has
for its object-matter means to Ends supposed to be set before the mind,
the next step is Deliberation, the next Decision, the last the definite
extending of the mental hand towards the object thus selected, the
two last constitute [Greek: proairesis] in its full meaning. The word
[Greek: orexis] means literally "a grasping at or after" now as this
physically may be either vague or definite, so too may the mental act,
consequently the term as transferred to the mind has two uses, and
denotes either the first wish, [Greek: boulaesis], or the last definite
movement, Will in its strict and proper sense. These two uses are
recognised in the Rhetoric (I 10), where [Greek: orexis] is divided into
[Greek: alogos] and [Greek: logistikae].

The illustration then afforded by the polities alluded to is this, as
the Kings first decided and then announced their decision for acceptance
and execution by their subjects, so Reason, having decided on the course
to be taken, communicates its decision to the Will, which then proceeds
to move [Greek: ta organika merae]. To instance in an action of the
mixed kind mentioned in the first chapter, safe arrival at land is
naturally desired, two means are suggested, either a certain loss of
goods, or trying to save both lives and goods, the question being
debated, the former is chosen, this decision is communicated to the
Will, which causes the owner's hands to throw overboard his goods: the
act is denominated voluntary, because the Will is consenting, but in so
denominating it, we leave out of sight how that consent was obtained. In
a purely compulsory case the never gets beyond the stage of Wish, for
no means are power and deliberation therefore is useless, consequently
there is neither Decision nor Will, in other words, no Choice.

P. 54, 1. 18. Compare the statement in the Rhetoric, 1 10, [Greek: esti
d hae men boulaeis agathou orexis (oudeis gar bouletai all ae otan
oiaetho einai agathon)]

P 56, 1. 34. A stone once set in motion cannot be recalled, because
it is then placed under the operation of natural laws which cannot be
controlled or altered, so too in Moral declension, there is a point at
which gravitation operates irretrievably, "there is a certain bound to
imprudence and misbehaviour which being transgressed, there remains no
place for repentance in the natural course of things." Bishop Butler's
Analogy, First Part, chap 11.

P 58, 1. 14. Habits being formed by acting in a certain way under
certain circumstances we can only choose how we will act not what
circumstances we will have to act under.

P. 59, 1. 19. "Moral Courage" is our phrase.

P 61, 1. 6. The meaning of this passage can scarcely be conveyed except
by a paraphrase.

"The object of each separate act of working is that which accords with
the habit they go to form. Courage is the habit which separate acts of
bravery go to form, therefore the object of these is that which accords
with Courage, _i.e._ Courage itself. But Courage is honourable (which
implies that the end and object of it is honour, since things are
denominated according to their end and object), therefore the object of
each separate act of bravery is honour."

P 62, 1. 14. For true Courage is required, i. Exact appreciation of
danger. 2. A Proper motive for resisting fear. Each of the Spurious
kinds will be found to fail in one or other, or both.

P 63, 1. 11. This may merely mean, "who give strict orders" not to
flinch, which would imply the necessity of compulsion The word is
capable of the sense given above, which seems more forcible.

P 63, 1. 19. See Book VI. chap. xiii. near the end [Greek: sokrataes
aehen oun logous tas aretas oeto einai (epiotaemas gar einai pasas)]

P 63, 1. 24. Such as the noise, the rapid movements, and apparent
confusion which to an inexperienced eye and ear would be alarming. So
Livy says of the Gauls, v. 37, Nata in _vanos_ tumultus gens.

P. 64, 1. 5. In Coronea in Boeotia, on the occasion of the citadel being
betrayed to some Phocians. "The regulars" were Boeotian troops, the
[Greek: politika] Coroneans.

P. 64, 1. 9. By the difference of tense it seems Aristotle has mixed
up two things, beginning to speak of the particular instance, and then
carried into the general statement again. This it is scarce worth while
to imitate.

P. 68, 1. 8. The meaning of the phrase [Greek: kata sumbebaekos], as
here used, in given in the Seventh Book, chap. X. [Greek: ei gar tis
todi dia todi aireitai ae diokei, kath ahuto men touto diokei kai
aireitai, kata sumbebaekos de to proteron].

P. 97, 1. 2. Perhaps "things which reflect credit on them" as on page
95.

P. 100, 1. 12. Book VII.

P. 101, 1. 11. Each term is important to make up the character of
Justice, men must have the capacity, do the acts, and do them from moral
choice.

P. 102, 1. 1. But not always. [Greek: Philein], for instance, has two
senses, "to love" and "to kiss," [Greek: misein] but one. Topics, I.
chap. XIII. 5.

P. 102, 1. 6. _Things_ are [Greek: homonuma] which have only their name
in common, being in themselves different. The [Greek: homonumia] is
_close_ therefore when the difference though real is but slight. There
is no English expression for [Greek: homonumia], "equivocal" being
applied to a term and not to its various significates.

P. 102, 1. 24. See Book I. chap. 1. [Greek: toiautaen de tina planaen
echei kai tagatha k.t.l.]

P. 104, 1. 10. A man habitually drunk in private is viewed by our law as
confining his vice to himself, and the law therefore does not attempt
to touch him; a religious hermit may be viewed as one who confines his
virtue to his own person.

P. 105, 1. 5. See the account of Sejanus and Livia. Tac. Annal. IV. 3.

P. 105, 1. 31. Cardwell's text, which here gives [Greek: paranomon],
yields a much easier and more natural sense. All Injustice violates
law, but only the particular kinds violate equality; and therefore the
unlawful : the unequal :: universal Injustice the particular _i.e._ as
whole to part. There is a reading which also alters the words within the
parenthesis, but this hardly affects the gist of the passage.

P. 106, 1. 19. There are two reasons why the characters are not
necessarily coincident. He is a good citizen, who does his best to carry
out the [Greek: politeia] under which he lives, but this may be faulty,
so therefore _pro tanto_ is he.

Again, it is sufficient, so far as the Community is concerned, that
he does the _facts_ of a good man but for the perfection of his own
individual character, he must do them virtuously. A man may move rightly
in his social orbit, without revolving rightly on his own axis.

The question is debated in the Politics, III. 2. Compare also the
distinction between the brave man, and good soldier (supra, Book III.
chap. xii.), and also Bishop Butler's first Sermon.

P. 107, 1. 17. Terms used for persons.

P. 107, 1. 34. By [Greek:----] is meant numbers themselves, 4, 20, 50,
etc, by [Greek:----] these numbers exemplified, 4 horses, 20 sheep, etc.

P 108, 1 14. The profits of a mercantile transaction (say \A31000) are to
be divided between A and B, in the ratio of 2 to 3 (which is the real
point to be settled); then,

A \95 B . 400 600.

A 400 : . B 600 (permutando, and assuming a value for A and B, so as to
make them commensurable with the respectiy sums).

A+400 : B+600 : : A \95 B. This represents the actual distribution; its
fairness depending entirely on that of the first proportion.

P. 109, 1. 10. _i.e._ Corrective Justice is wrought out by subtraction
from the wrong doer and addition to the party injured.

P. 110, 1. 3. Her Majesty's "Justices."

P. 111, 1. 1. I have omitted the next three lines, as they seem to be
out of place here, and to occur much more naturally afterwards; it not
being likely that they were originally twice written, one is perhaps at
liberty to give Aristotle the benefit of the doubt, and conclude that he
put them where they made the best sense.

P. 111, 1. 8. This I believe to be the meaning of the passage but do not
pretend to be able to get it out of the words.

P 111, 1. 27. This is apparently contrary to what was said before, but
not really so. Aristotle does not mean that the man in authority struck
wrongfully, but he takes the extreme case of simple Reciprocation, and
in the second case, the man who strikes one in authority commits two
offences, one against the person (and so far they are equal), and
another against the office.

P. 112, 1. 5. [Greek:----] denotes, 1st, a kindly feeling issuing in a
gratuitous act of kindness, 2ndly, the effect of this act of kindness
on a generous mind; 3rdly, this effect issuing in a requital of the
kindness.

P. 113, 1. 33. The Shoemaker would get a house while the Builder only
had (say) one pair of shoes, or at all events not so many as he ought to
have. Thus the man producing the least valuable ware would get the most
valuable, and _vice versa_.

Adopting, as I have done, the reading which omits [Greek:----] at
[Greek:----], we have simply a repetition of the caution, that before
Reciprocation is attempted, there must be the same ratio between the
wares as between the persons, _i.e._ the ratio of equality.

If we admit [Greek: ou], the meaning may be, that you must not bring
into the proportion the difference mentioned above [Greek: eteron kai
ouk ison], since for the purposes of commerce all men are equal.

Say that the Builder is to the Shoemaker as 10:1. Then there must be
the same ratio between the wares, consequently the highest artist
will carry off the most valuable wares, thus combining in himself both
[Greek: uperochai]. The following are the three cases, given 100 pr.
shoes = 1 house.

  Builder : Shoemaker : : 1  pr.  shoes      : 1 house--_wrong_.
 -----  -----       100 pr. shoes	   : 1 house--_right_
 -----  -----       10 (100 pr. shoes) : 1 house--_wrong_.

P. 185, l. 30. Every unjust act embodies [Greek: to adikon], which is
a violation of [Greek: to ison], and so implies a greater and a less
share, the former being said to fall to the doer, the latter to the
sufferer, of injury.

P. 116, l. 18. In a pure democracy men are absolutely, _i.e._
numerically, equal, in other forms only proportionately equal. Thus the
meanest British subject is proportionately equal to the Sovereign, that
is to say, is as fully secured in his rights as the Sovereign in hers.

P. 118, l. 8. Or, according to Cardwell's reading ([Greek: kineton ou
mentoi pan]) "but amongst ourselves there is Just, which is naturally
variable, but certainly all Just is not such." The sense of the passage
is not affected by the reading. In Bekker's text we must take [Greek:
kineton] to mean the same as [Greek: kinoumenon], _i.e._ "we admit there
is no Just which has not been sometimes disallowed, still," etc. With
Cardwell's, [Greek: kineton] will mean "which not only _does_ but
naturally _may_ vary."

P. 118, l. 33. Murder is unjust by the law of nature, Smuggling by
enactment. Therefore any act which can be referred to either of these
heads is an unjust act, or, as Bishop Butler phrases it, an act
_materially_ unjust. Thus much may be decided without reference to the
agent. See the note on page 32, l. 16.

P. 121, l. 13. "As distinct from pain or loss." Bishop Butler's Sermon
on Resentment. See also, Rhet. 11. 2 Def. of [Greek: orgae].

P. 121, l. 19. This method of reading the passage is taken from Zell
as quoted in Cardwell's Notes, and seems to yield the best sense. The
Paraphrast gives it as follows:

"But the aggressor is not ignorant that he began, and so he feels
himself to be wrong [and will not acknowledge that he is the aggressor],
but the other does not."

P. 122, l.18. As when a man is "_justified_ at the Grass Market,"
_i.e._ hung. P. 125, 1. 36. Where the stock of good is limited, if any
individual takes more than his share some one else must have less than
his share; where it is infinite, or where there is no good at all this
cannot happen.

P. 128,1 24. The reference is to chap. vii. where it was said that the
law views the parties in a case of particular injustice as originally
equal, but now unequal, the wrong doer the gainer and the sufferer the
loser by the wrong, but in the case above supposed there is but _one_
party.

P, 129, 1. 25. So in the Politics, 1. 2. _Hae men gar psuchae tou
somatos archei despotikaen archaen, o de nous taes orexeos politikaen
kai despotikaev._ Compare also Bishop Butler's account of human nature
as a system--of the different authority of certain principles, and
specially the supremacy of Conscience.

P. 130, 1. 8. I understand the illustration to be taken from the process
of lowering a weight into its place; a block of marble or stone, for
instance, in a building.

P. 131, 1 8. Called for convenience sake Necessary and Contingent
matter.

P. 131, 1. 13. One man learns Mathematics more easily than another, in
common language, _he has a turn for_ Mathematics, _i e_ something in his
mental conformation answers to that science The Phrenologist shows the
bump denoting this aptitude.

P. 131, 1. 21. And therefore the question resolves itself into this,
"What is the work of the Speculative, and what of the Practical, faculty
of Reason." See the description of _apetae_ II. 5.

P. 131, 1. 33. _praxis_ is here used in its strict and proper meaning.

P. 131,1. 34. That is to say, the Will waits upon deliberation in which
Reason is the judge; when the decision is pronounced, the Will must act
accordingly.

The question at issue always is, _Is this Good?_ because the Will is
only moved by an impression of Good; the Decision then will be always
_Aye or No_, and the mental hand is put forth to grasp in the former
case, and retracted in the later.

So far as what must take place in _every_ Moral Action, right or wrong,
the Machinery of the mind being supposed uninjured but to constitute a
good Moral Choice, _i e._. a good Action, the Reason must have said Aye
when it ought.

The cases of faulty action will be, either when the Machinery is perfect
but wrongly directed, as in the case of a deliberate crime, or when the
direction given by the Reason is right but the Will does not move in
accordance with that direction, in other words, when the Machinery is
out of order; as in the case of the [Greek: akrates]--video meliora
proboque, Deteriora sequor.

P. 132, l. 9. See the note on [Greek: Arche] on page 4, l. 30.

P. 133, l. 6. The mind attains truth, either for the sake of truth
itself ([Greek: aplos]), or for the sake of something further ([Greek:
eneka tinos]). If the first then either syllogistically ([Greek:
episteme]), non-syllogistically ([Greek: nous]), or by union of the two
methods ([Greek: sophla]). If the second, either with a view to _act_
([Greek: phronesis]), or with a view to _make_ ([Greek: techne]).

Otherwise. The mind contemplates Matter Necessary or Contingent. If
necessary, Principles ([Greek: nous]), Deductions ([Greek: episteme]),
or Mixed ([Greek: sophla]). If Contingent, Action ([Greek: phronesis]),
Production ([Greek: techen]). (Giphanius quoted in Cardwell's notes.)

P. 133, l. 20. The cobbler is at his last, why? to make shoes, which
are to clothe the feet of someone and the price to be paid, _i.e._
the produce of his industry, is to enable him to support his wife and
children; thus his production is subordinate to Moral Action.

P. 133, l. 23. It may be fairly presumed that Aristotle would not thus
have varied his phrase without some real difference of meaning. That
difference is founded, I think, on the two senses of [Greek: orexis]
before alluded to (note, p. 53, l. 33). The first impulse of the
mind towards Action may be given either by a vague desire or by the
suggestion of Reason. The vague desire passing through the deliberate
stage would issue in Moral Choice. Reason must enlist the Will before
any Action can take place.

Reason ought to be the originator in all cases, as Bishop Butler
observes that Conscience should be. If this were so, every act of Moral
Choice would be [Greek: orektikos nous].

But one obvious function of the feelings and passions in our composite
nature is to instigate Action, when Reason and Conscience by themselves
do not: so that as a matter of fact our Moral Choice is, in general,
fairly described as [Greek: orexis dianoetike]. See Bishop Butler's
Sermon II. and the First upon Compassion.

P. 133, l. 24. It is the opening statement of the Post Analytics.

P. 133, l. 27. Aristotle in his logical analysis of Induction, Prior.
Analytics II. 25, defines it to be "the proving the inherence of the
major term in the middle (_i.e._ proving the truth of the major premiss
in fig. 1) through the minor term." He presupposes a Syllogism in the
first Figure with an universal affirmative conclusion, which reasons, of
course, from an universal, which universal is to be taken as proved by
Induction. His doctrine turns upon a canon which he there quotes. "If
of one and the same term two others be predicated, one of which is
coextensive with that one and the same, the other may be predicated of
that which is thus coextensive." The fact of this coextensiveness must
be ascertained by [Greek: nous], in other words, by the Inductive
Faculty. We will take Aldrich's instance. All Magnets attract iron \ A B
C are Magnets | Presupposed Syllogism reasoning A B C attract iron. /
from an universal.

A B C attract iron (Matter of observation and experiment)

All Magnets are A B C (Assumed by [Greek: nous], i.e. the Inductive
faculty)

All Magnets attract iron (Major premiss of the last Syllogism proved by
taking the minor term of that for the middle term of this.)

Or, according to the canon quoted above: A B C are Magnets. A B C
attract iron.

But [Greek: nous] tells me that the term Magnets is coextensive with the
term A B C, therefore of all Magnets I may predicate that they attract
iron.

Induction is said by Aristotle to be [Greek: hoia phanton], but he says
in the same place that for this reason we must _conceive_ ([Greek:
noehin]) the term containing the particular Instances (as A B C above)
as composed of all the Individuals.

If Induction implied actual examination of all particular instances it
would cease to be Reasoning at all and sink into repeated acts of Simple
Apprehension it is really the bridging over of a chasm, not the steps
cut in the rock on either side to enable us to walk down into and again
out of it. It is a branch of probable Reasoning, and its validity
depends _entirely_ upon the quality of the particular mind which
performs it. Rapid Induction has always been a distinguishing mark of
Genius the certainty produced by it is Subjective and not Objective. It
may be useful to exhibit it Syllogistically, but the Syllogism which
exhibits it is either nugatory, or contains a premiss _literally_ false.
It will be found useful to compare on the subject of Induction _as the
term is used by Aristotle_, Analytica Prior. II 25 26 Analytica Post. I.
1, 3, and I. Topics VI I and X.

P 133 1 32. The reference is made to the Post Analyt I II and it is
impossible to understand the account of [Greek: epistaemae] without a
perusal of the chapter, the additions to the definition referred to
relate to the nature of the premisses from which [Greek: epistaemae]
draws its conclusions they are to be "true, first principles incapable
of any syllogistic proof, better known than the conclusion, prior to it,
and causes of it." (See the appendix to this Book.)

P 134 1 12. This is the test of correct logical division, that the
_membra dividentia_ shall be opposed, _i.e._ not included the one by the
other. P. 134, l. 13. The meaning of the [Greek: hepehi] appears to be
this: the appeal is made in the first instance to popular language, just
as it the case of [Greek: epistaemae], and will be in those of [Greek:
phronaesis] and [Greek: sophia]. We commonly call Architecture an Art,
and it is so and so, therefore the name Art and this so and so are
somehow connected to prove that connection to be "coextensiveness," we
predicate one of the other and then simply convert the proposition,
which is the proper test of any logical definition, or of any specific
property. See the Topics, 1. vi.

P. 135, l. 2. See the parable of the unjust Steward, in which the
popular sense of [Greek: phronaesis] is strongly brought out; [Greek:
ephaenesen ho kurios ton oikonomon taes adikias oti phronimos epoiaesen
hoti ohi viohi tou aionos toutou phronimoteroi, k.t.l.]--Luke xvi. 8.

P. 135, l. 5. Compare the [Greek: aplos] and [Greek: kath' ekasta
pepaideumenos] of Book I. chap. 1.

P. 135, l. 35. The two aspects under which Virtue may be considered as
claiming the allegiance of moral agents are, that of being right,
and that of being truly expedient, because Conscience and Reasonable
Self-Love are the two Principles of our moral constitution naturally
supreme and "Conscience and Self-Love, _if we understand our true
happiness_, always lead us the same way." Bishop Butler, end of Sermon
III.

And again:

"If by _a sense of interest_ is meant a practical regard to what is
upon the whole our Happiness this is not only coincident with the
principle of Virtue or Moral Rectitude, but is a part of the idea
itself. And it is evident this Reasonable Self-Love wants to be
improved as really as any principle in our nature. So little cause is
there for Moralists to disclaim this principle." From the note on
sect. iv. of the chapter on Moral Discipline, Analogy, part I chap. v.

P. 136, l. 6. See the note on [Greek: Arche] on page 4, l. 30.

The student will find it worth while to compare this passage with the
following--Chap. xiii. of this book beginning [Greek: e d' exis to
ommati touto k. t. l]--vii. 4. [Greek: eti kai ode physikos. k.t.l.]
vii. 9.--[Greek: ae gar arethae kai ae mochthaeria. k.t.l.]--iii. 7 _ad
finem_. [Greek: ei de tis legoi. k.t.l.]

P. 136, l. 15. This is not quite fair. Used in its strict sense, Art
does not admit of degrees of excellence any more than Practical Wisdom.
In popular language we use the term "wiser man," as readily as "better
artist" really denoting in each case different degrees of approximation
to Practical Wisdom and Art respectively, [Greek: dia to ginesthai tous
epainous di anaphoras]. I. 12.

P. 136, l. 17. He would be a _better Chymist_ who should poison
intentionally, than he on whose mind the prevailing impression was that
"Epsom Salts mean Oxalic Acid, and Syrup of Senna Laudanum." P. 137,
l. 13. The term Wisdom is used in our English Translation of the Old
Testament in the sense first given to [Greek:----] here. "Then wrought
Bezaleel and Ahohab, and every _wise-hearted man, in whom the Lord put
wisdom and understanding_ to know how to work all manner of work for the
service of the Sanctuary" Exodus xxxvi. i.

P. 137 l. 27. [Greek:----] and [Greek:----], (in the strict sense, for it
is used in many different senses in this book) are different parts of
the whole function [Greek:----], [Greek:----] takes in conclusions, drawn
by strict reasoning from Principles of a certain kind which [Greek:
----] supplies. It is conceivable that a man might go on gaining these
principles by Intuition and never reasoning from them, and so [Greek:
----] might exist independent of [Greek:----], but not this without that.
Put the two together, the head to the trunk, and you form the living
being [Greek:----]. There are three branches of [Greek:----] according
to Greek Philosophy, [Greek:----], [Greek:----], [Greek:----]. Science is
perhaps the nearest English term, but we have none really equivalent.

P 137, l. 29. [Greek:----] is here used in its most extensive sense,
[Greek:----] would be its chief Instrument.

P. 138, l. 16. The faculty concerned with which is [Greek:----].

P. 139, l. 16. In every branch of Moral Action in which Practical Wisdom
is employed there will be general principles, and the application of
them, but in some branches there are distinct names appropriated to the
operations of Practical Wisdom, in others there are not.

Thus Practical Wisdom, when employed on the general principles of Civil
Government, is called Legislation, as administering its particular
functions it is called simply Government. In Domestic Management, there
are of course general Rules, and also the particular application of
them; but here the faculty is called only by one name. So too when
Self-Interest is the object of Practical Wisdom.

P. 139, l. 27. [Greek:----], "our mere Operatives in Public business."
(Chalmers.)

P. 139, l. 32. Practical Wisdom may be employed either respecting Self,
(which is [Greek:----] proper) or not-Self, _i.e._ either one's
family=[Greek:----], or one's community=[Greek:----], but here the
supreme and subordinate are distinguished, the former is [Greek:----],
the latter [Greek:----] proper, whose functions are deliberation and
the administration of justice.

P. 140, l. 16. But where can this be done, if there be no community?
see Horace's account of the way in which his father made him reap
instruction from the examples in the society around him. 1. Sat. iv.
105, etc. See also Bishop Butler, Analogy, part I. chap. v. sect. iii.

The whole question of the Selfish Morality is treated in Bishop Butler's
first three and the eleventh Sermons, in which he shows the coincidence
in _fact_ of enlightened Self-Love and Benevolence _i.e._ love of
others. Compare also what is said in the first Book of this treatise,
chap. v., about [Greek: autarkeia].

P. 140, l. 17. More truly "implied," namely, that Practical Wisdom
results from experience.

P. 140, l. 23. This observation seems to be introduced, simply because
suggested by the last, and not because at all relevant to the matter in
hand.

P. 140, l. 27. An instance of Principles gained [Greek: aisthesei].
(Book 1. chap. viii.)

P. 141, l. 1. Particulars are called [Greek: eschata] because they are
last arrived at in the deliberative process, but a little further on we
have the term applied to first principles, because they stand at one
extremity, and facts at the other, of the line of action.

P. 141, l. 12. I prefer the reading [Greek: e phronesis], which gives
this sense, "Well, as I have said, Practical Wisdom is this kind of
sense, and the other we mentioned is different in kind." In a passage so
utterly unimportant, and thrown in almost colloquially, it is not worth
while to take much trouble about such a point.

P. 141, l. 25. The definition of it in the Organon (Post Analyt. 1.
xxiv.), "a happy conjecture of the middle term without time to consider
of it."

The quaestio states the phenomena, and the middle term the causation
the rapid ascertaining of which constitutes [Greek: anchinoia]. All
that receives light from the sun is bright on the side next to the
sun. The moon receives light from the sun, The moon is bright on the
side next the sun. The [Greek: anchinoia] consists in rapidly and
correctly accounting for the observed fact, that the moon is bright on
the side next to the sun.

P. 141, l. 34. Opinion is a complete, deliberation an incomplete, mental
act.

P. 142, l. 19. The End does not sanctify the Means.

P. 142, l. 28. The meaning is, there is one End including all others;
and in this sense [Greek: phronesis] is concerned with means, not Ends
but there are also many subordinate Ends which are in fact Means to the
Great End of all. Good counsel has reference not merely to the grand
End, but to the subordinate Ends which [Greek: phronesis] selects as
being right means to the Grand End of all. P. 142,1. 34. The relative
[Greek: on] might be referred to [Greek: sumpheron], but that [Greek:
eubonlia] has been already divided into two kinds, and this construction
would restrict the name to one of them, namely that [Greek: pros ti
telos] as opposed to that [Greek: pros to telos aplos].

P. 143,1 27. We have no term which at all approximates to the meaning of
this word, much less will our language admit of the play upon it which
connects it with [Greek: suggnomae].

P. 144, 1 i. Meaning, of course, all those which relate to Moral Action.
[Greek: psronaesis ] is equivalent to [Greek: euboulia, ounesis, gnomae,
and nous] (in the new sense here given to it).

The faculty which guides us truly in all matters of Moral Action is
[Greek: phronaesis], i.e. Reason directed by Goodness or Goodness
informed by Reason. But just as every faculty of body and soul is not
actually in operation at the same time, though the Man is acting, so
proper names are given to the various Functions of Practical Wisdom.

Is the [Greek: phronimos] forming plans to attain some particular End?
he is then [Greek: euboulos]--is he passing under review the suggestions
of others? he is [Greek: sunetos]--is he judging of the acts of others?
he admits [Greek: gnomae] to temper the strictness of justness--is he
applying general Rules to particular cases? he is exercising [Greek:
nous praktikos] or [Greek: agsthaesis]--while in each and all he is
[Greek: phronimos]?

P. 144, 1. 7. See note, on p. 140.

P 144 1.19. There are cases where we must simply accept or reject
without proof: either when Principles are propounded which are prior to
all reasoning, or when particular facts are brought before us which are
simply matters of [Greek: agsthaesis]. Aristotle here brings both these
cases within the province of [Greek: nous], _i.e._ he calls by this name
the Faculty which attains Truth in each.

P. 144, 1. 25. _i.e._ of the [Greek: syllogisimai ton prakton].

P 144,1 27. See the note on [Greek: Archae] on p. 4,1 30. As a matter of
fact and mental experience the Major Premiss of the Practica Syllogism
is wrought into the mind by repeatedly acting upon the Minor Premiss
(_i.e._ by [Greek: ethismos]).

  All that is pleasant is to be done,
  This is pleasant,
  This is to be done

By habitually acting on the Minor Premiss, _i.e._ on the suggestions
of [Greek: epithymia], a man comes really to hold the Major Premiss.
Aristotle says of the man destitute of all self-control that he is
firmly persuaded that it is his proper line to pursue the gratification
of his bodily appetites, [Greek: dia to toioytos einai oios diokein
aytas]. And his analysis of [Greek: akrasia] (the state of progress
towards this utter abandonment to passion) shows that each case of
previous good resolution succumbing to temptation is attributable to
[Greek: epithymia] suggesting its own Minor Premiss in place of the
right one. Book VII. 8 and 5. P. 145, l. 4. The _consequentia_ is this:

There are cases both of principles and facts which cannot admit of
reasoning, and must be authoritatively determined by [Greek: nous]. What
makes [Greek: nous] to be a true guide? only practice, i.e. Experience,
and _therefore_, etc.

P. 145, l. 22. This is a note to explain [Greek: hygieina] and [Greek:
euektika], he gives these three uses of the term [Greek: hygieinon] in
the Topics, I. xiii. 10,

  { [Greek: to men hygieias poi\E6tikon], [Greek: hygieinon legetai]
  { [Greek: to de phylaktikon],
  { [Greek: to de s\E6mantikon].

Of course the same will apply to [Greek: euektikon].

  P. 146, l. 11. Healthiness is the formal cause of health.
  Medicine is the efficient.

See Book X. chap. iv. [Greek: hosper oud h\E6 hygieia kai ho iatros
homoios aitia esti tou ugiainein].

P. 146, l. 17. [Greek: phron\E6sis] is here used in a partial sense
to signify the Intellectual, as distinct from the Moral, element of
Practical Wisdom.

P. 146, l. 19. This is another case of an observation being thrown in
_obiter_, not relevant to, but suggested by, the matter in hand.

P. 146, l. 22. See Book II. chap. iii. and V. xiii.

P. 147, l. 6. The article is supplied at [Greek: panourgous], because
the abstract word has just been used expressly in a bad sense. "Up to
anything" is the nearest equivalent to [Greek: panourgos], but too
nearly approaches to a colloquial vulgarism.

P. 147, l. 13. See the note on [Greek: Arch\E6] on page 4, l. 30.

P. 147, l. 14. And for the Minor, of course,

"This particular action is------."

We may paraphrase [Greek: to telos] by [Greek: ti dei prattein--ti
gar dei prattein h\E6 m\E6, to telos aut\E6s estin] i.e. [Greek: t\E6s
phron\E6seos].--(Chap. xi. of this Book.)

P. 147, l. 19. "Look asquint on the face of truth." Sir T. Browne,
Religio Medici.

P. 147, l. 26. The term [Greek: sophronikoi] must be understood as
governing the signification of the other two terms, there being no
single Greek term to denote in either case mere dispositions towards
these Virtues.

P. 147, l. 30. Compare the passage at the commencement of Book X.
[Greek: nun de phainontai] [Greek: katokochimon ek t\E6s aret\E6s].

P. 148, l. 10. It must be remembered, that [Greek: phron\E6sis] is used
throughout this chapter in two senses, its proper and complete sense
of Practical Wisdom, and its incomplete one of merely the Intellectual
Element of it. P. 152, 1. 1. The account of Virtue and Vice hitherto
given represents rather what men _may be_ than what they _are_. In this
book we take a practical view of Virtue and Vice, in their ordinary,
every day development.

P. 152, 1. 17. This illustrates the expression, "_Deceits_ of the
Flesh."

P. 156, 1. 12. Another reading omits the [Greek:----]; the meaning of
the whole passage would be exactly the same--it would then run, "if he
had been convinced of the rightness of what he does, _i.e._ if he were
now acting on conviction, he might stop in his course on a change of
conviction."

P. 158, 1. 4. Major and minor Premises of the [Greek:----]
[Greek----]

P. 158, 1. 8. Some necessarily implying knowledge of the particular,
others not.

P 158, 1. 31. As a modern parallel, take old Trumbull in Scott's "Red
Gauntlet."

P. 159, 1. 23. That is, as I understand it, either the major or the
minor premise, it is true, that "all that is sweet is pleasant," it is
true also, that "this is sweet," what is contrary to Right Reason is the
bringing in this minor to the major _i.e._ the universal maxim,
forbidding to taste. Thus, a man goes to a convivial meeting with the
maxim in his mind "All excess is to be avoided," at a certain time his
[Greek:----] tells him "This glass is excess." As a matter of mere
reasoning, he cannot help receiving the conclusion "This glass is to be
avoided," and supposing him to be morally sound he would accordingly
abstain. But [Greek:----], being a simple tendency towards indulgence
suggests, in place of the minor premise "This is excess," its own
premise "This is sweet," this again suggests the self-indulgent maxim or
principle ('[Greek:----]), "All that is sweet is to be tasted," and so,
by strict logical sequence, proves "This glass is to be tasted."

The solution then of the ph\E6nomenon of [Greek:----] is this that
[Greek:----], by its direct action on the animal nature, swamps the
suggestions of Right Reason.

On the high ground of Universals, [Greek:----] i.e. [Greek:----]
easily defeats [Greek:----]. The [Greek:----], an hour before he is in
temptation, would never deliberately prefer the maxim "All that is sweet
is to be tasted" to "All excess is to be avoided." The [Greek:----]
would.

  Horace has a good comment upon this (II Sat 2):

    Qu\E6 virtus et quanta, bom, sit vivere parvo
    Discite, _non inter lances mensasque nitentes_
    Verum hic _impransi_ mecum disquirite

Compare also Proverbs XXIII. 31. "Look not thou upon the wine when it is
red," etc. P. 160, l. 2. [Greek: oron]. Aristotle's own account of this
word (Prior Analyt ii. 1) is [Greek: eis on dialuetai hae protasis],
but both in the account of [Greek: nous] and here it seems that the
proposition itself is really indicated by it.

P. 161, l. 16. The Greek would give "avoids excessive pain," but this is
not true, for the excess of pain would be ground for excuse the warrant
for translating as in the text, is the passage occurring just below
[Greek: diokei tas uperbolas kai pheugei metrias lupas].

P. 162, l. 11. Compare Bishop Butler on Particular Propensions, Analogy,
Part I chap v sect. iv.

P. 162, l. 35. That is, they are to the right states as Vice to Virtue.

P. 165, l. 4 Consult in connection with this Chapter the Chapter on
[Greek: orgae] in the Rhetoric, II. 2, and Bishop Butler's Sermon on
Resentment.

P. 166, l. 7. The reasoning here being somewhat obscure from the
concisement of expression, the following exposition of it is subjoined.

  Actions of Lust are wrong actions done with pleasure,
  Wrong actions done with pleasure are more justly objects of wrath,

[Footnote: [Greek: hubpis] is introduced as the single instance from
which this premiss is proved inductively. See the account of it in the
Chapter of the Rhetoric referred to in the preceding note.]

  Such as are more justly objects of wrath are more unjust,
  Actions of Lust are more unjust

P. 168, l. 3. [Greek: ton dae lechthenton]. Considerable difference of
opinion exists as to the proper meaning of these words. The emendation
which substitutes [Greek: akrataes] for [Greek: akolastos] removes all
difficulty, as the clause would then naturally refer to [Greek: ton mae
proairoumenon] but Zell adheres to the reading in the text of Bekker,
because the authority of MSS and old editions is all on this side.

I understand [Greek: mallon] as meant to modify the word [Greek:
malakias], which properly denotes that phase of [Greek: akrasia] (not
[Greek: akolasia]) which is caused by pain.

The [Greek: akolastos] _deliberately_ pursues pleasure and declines pain
if there is to be a distinct name for the latter phase, it comes under
[Greek: malakia] more nearly than any other term, though perhaps not
quite properly.

Or the words may be understood as referring to the class of wrong acts
caused by avoidance of pain, whether deliberate or otherwise, and then
of course the names of [Greek: malakia] and [Greek: akolasia] may be
fitly given respectively.

P. 169, l. 29. "If we went into a hospital where all were sick or dying,
we should think those least ill who were insensible to pain; a physician
who knew the whole, would behold them with despair. And there is a
mortification of the soul as well as of the body, in which the first
symptoms of returning hope are pain and anguish" Sewell, Sermons to
Young Men (Sermon xii.)

P. 170, 1. 6. Before the time of trial comes the man deliberately makes
his Moral Choice to act rightly, but, at the moment of acting, the
powerful strain of desire makes him contravene this choice his Will does
not act in accordance with the affirmation or negation of his Reason.
His actions are therefore of the mixed kind. See Book III. chap. i, and
note on page 128.

P. 171, 1. 17. Let a man be punctual _on principle_ to any one
engagement in the day, and he must, as a matter of course, keep all his
others in their due places relatively to this one; and so will often
wear an appearance of being needlessly punctilious in trifles.

P. 172, 1. 21. Because he is destitute of these minor springs of action,
which are intended to supply the defects of the higher principle.

See Bishop Butler's first Sermon on Compassion, and the conclusion of
note on p. 129.

P. 179, 1. 4. Abandoning Bekker's punctuation and reading [Greek: mae
agathon], yields a better sense.

"Why will he want it on the supposition that it is not good? He can live
even with Pain because," etc.

P. 179, 1. 25. [Greek: pheugei] may be taken perhaps as equivalent
to [Greek: pheugouoi] and so balance [Greek: chairouoi]. But compare
Chapter VIII (Bekker).

P. 183, 1. 6. "Owe no man anything, but to _love_ one another for he
that loveth another _hath fulfilled the Law_." Romans XIII. 8.

P. 183, I. 20. [Greek: kerameis]. The Proverb in full is a line from
Hesiod, [Greek: kahi keramehus keramei koteei kai tektoni tekton].

P. 184, I. 33. In this sense, therefore, is it sung of Mrs. Gilpin that
she

  "two stone bottles found,
  To hold the liquor that she _loved_,
  And keep it safe and sound."

P. 187, 1. 24. Cardwell's reading, [Greek: tautae gar omoioi, kai ta
loipa] is here adopted, as yielding a better sense than Bekker's.

P. 192, 1. 34. The Great man will have a right to look for more
Friendship than he bestows, but the Good man _can_ feel Friendship only
for, and in proportion to, the goodness of the other.

P. 195, 1. 12. See note on page 68, 1. 8.

P. 202, 1. 28. See I. Topics, Chap. v. on the various senses of [Greek:
tauton].

P. 203, 1. 35. "For the mutual society, help, and comfort that the one
ought to have of the other, both in prosperity and adversity." P. 206,
1. 10. Which one would be assuming he was, if one declined to recognise
the obligation to requite the favour or kindness.

P. 217, 1. 10. "Neither the Son of man, that He should _repent_."
Numbers xxiii. 19.

"In a few instances the Second Intention, or Philosophical employment
of a Term, is more extensive than the First Intention, or popular use."
Whately, Logic, iii. 10.

P. 218, 1. 17. "I have sometimes considered in what troublesome case is
that Chamberlain in an Inn who being but one is to give attendance to
many guests. For suppose them all in one chamber, yet, if one shall
command him to come to the window, and the other to the table, and
another to the bed, and another to the chimney, and another to come
upstairs, and another to go downstairs, and all in the same instant,
how would he be distracted to please them all? And yet such is the sad
condition of nay soul by nature, not only a servant but a slave unto
sin. Pride calls me to the window, gluttony to the table, wantonness to
the bed, laziness to the chimney, ambition commands me to go upstairs,
and covetousness to come down. Vices, I see, are as well contrary to
themselves as to Virtue." (Fuller's Good Thoughts in Bad Times. Mix't
Contemplations, viii.)

P. 235, 1. 14. See note, p. 43.

P. 235, 1. 24. See Book II. chap. ix.

P. 237, 1. 3. See Book I. chap. v. ad finem.

P. 238, 1. 2. The notion alluded to is that of the [greek: idea]: that
there is no real substantial good except the [greek: auto agathon],
and therefore whatever is so called is so named in right of its
participation in that.

P. 238, 1. 9. See note on page 136, 1. 15.

P. 238, 1. 24. Movement is, according to Aristotle, of six kinds: [sidenote:Categories, chap xi.]From not being to being    .  .  .  .	 Generation
   From being to not being    .  .  .  .    Destruction
   From being to being more   .  .  .  .    Increase
   From being to being less   .  .  .  .    Diminution
   From being here to being there   .  .    Change of Place
   From being in this way to being in that  Alteration

P. 238, 1 31. _A_ may go to sleep quicker than _B_, but cannot _do more
sleep_ in a given time.

P. 239, 1. 3. Compare Book III. chap. vi. [Greek: osper kai epi ton
somaton, k. t. l.]

P. 241, 1. 6. Which is of course a [Greek: genesis].

P. 241, 1. 9. That is, subordinate Movements are complete before
the whole Movement is. P. 242, 1. 7. Pleasure is so instantaneous a
sensation, that it cannot be conceived divisible or incomplete; the
longest continued Pleasure is only a succession of single sparks, so
rapid as to give the appearance of a stream, of light.

P. 245, 1. 18. A man is as effectually hindered from taking a walk by
the [Greek: allotria haedouae] of reading a novel, as by the [Greek:
oikeia lupae] of gout in the feet.

P. 249, 1. 12. I have thus rendered [Greek: spoudae (ouk agnoon to
hamartanomenon)]; but, though the English term does not represent the
depth of the Greek one, it is some approximation to the truth to connect
an earnest serious purpose with Happiness.

P. 250, 1. 12. Bishop Butler, _contra_ (Sermon XV.).

"Knowledge is not our proper Happiness. Whoever will in the least attend
to the thing will see that it is the gaining, not the having, of it,
which is the entertainment of the mind." The two statements may however
be reconciled. Aristotle may be well understood only to mean, that the
pursuit of knowledge will be the pleasanter, the freer it is from the
minor hindrances which attend on _learning_.

Footnote P. 250, 1. 30. The clause immediately following indicates that
Aristotle felt this statement to be at first sight startling, Happiness
having been all the way through connected with [Greek: energeia], but
the statement illustrates and confirms what was said in note on page 6,
1. 15.

P. 251, 1. 7. That is to say, he aims at producing not merely a happy
aggregate, but an aggregate of happy individuals. Compare what is said
of Legislators in the last chapter of Book I and the first of Book II.

P. 252, 1. 22. See note, page 146, 1. 17.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Ethics, by Aristotle

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ETHICS ***

This file should be named 8ethc10.txt or 8ethc10.zip
Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks get a new NUMBER, 8ethc11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 8ethc10a.txt

Produced by Ted Garvin, David Widger and the DP Team

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*

                             SECOND FOUNDATION

                                ISAAC ASIMOV

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                  Contents

PROLOGUE

                         PART I SEARCH BY THE MULE

1. TWO MEN AND THE MULE

First Interlude

2. TWO MEN WITHOUT THE MULE

Second Interlude

3. TWO MEN AND A PEASANT

Third Interlude

4. TWO MEN AND THE ELDERS

Fourth Interlude

5. ONE MAN AND THE MULE

6. ONE MAN, THE MULE  AND ANOTHER

Last Interlude

                      PART II SEARCH BY THE FOUNDATION

7. ARCADIA

8. SELDON'S PLAN

9. THE CONSPIRATORS

10. APPROACHING CRISIS

11. STOWAWAY

12. LORD

13. LADY

14. ANXIETY

15. THROUGH THE GRID

16. BEGINNING OF WAR

17. WAR

18. GHOST OF A WORLD

19. END OF WAR

20. "I KNOW ..."

21. THE ANSWER THAT SATISFIED

22. THE ANSWER THAT WAS TRUE

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                  Prologue

The First  Galactic Empire had endured  for tens of thousands  of years. It
had included all the planets of the Galaxy in a centralized rule, sometimes
tyrannical,  sometimes   benevolent,  always  orderly.   Human  beings  had
forgotten that any other form of existence could be.

All except Hari Seldon.

Hari Seldon was the last great scientist of the First Empire. It was he who
brought   the  science   of   psycho-history  to   its  full   development.
Psycho-history  was the quintessence  of sociology,  it was the  science of
human behavior reduced to mathematical equations.

The  individual human being  is unpredictable,  but the reactions  of human
mobs, Seldon found, could be treated statistically. The larger the mob, the
greater  the accuracy  that could be  achieved. And  the size of  the human
masses  that Seldon  worked with  was no  less than  the population  of the
Galaxy   which   in   his   time   was  numbered   in   the   quintillions.

It  was Seldon,  then, who  foresaw, against  all common sense  and popular
belief, that the brilliant  Empire which seemed so strong was in a state of
irremediable decay and decline.  He foresaw (or he solved his equations and
interpreted  its symbols,  which amounts  to the  same thing) that  left to
itself,  the Galaxy  would pass  through a  thirty thousand year  period of
misery  and  anarchy before  a  unified  government would  rise once  more.

He set  about to  remedy the situation,  to bring about a  state of affairs
that would  restore peace and  civilization in a single  thousand of years.
Carefully,  he   set  up   two  colonies  of  scientists   that  he  called
"Foundations." With deliberate intention,  he set them up "at opposite ends
of  the  Galaxy."  One  Foundation was  set  up  in  the  full daylight  of
publicity. The  existence of the other,  the Second Foundation, was drowned
in silence.

In  Foundation  (Gnome, 1951) and  Foundation and Empire  (Gnome, 1952) are
told the  first three centuries of the history  of the First Foundation. It
began as  a small community of Encyclopedists lost  in the emptiness of the
outer periphery of the Galaxy. Periodically, it faced a crisis in which the
variables of human intercourse,  of the social and economic currents of the
time constricted  about it. Its freedom to move  lay along only one certain
line  and when  it moved in  that direction,  a new horizon  of development
opened  before it.  All had  been planned  by Hari  Seldon, long  dead now.

The First  Foundation, with its superior  science, took over the barbarized
planets that surrounded it.  It faced the anarchic Warlords that broke away
from the  dying Empire  and beat them.  It faced the remnant  of the Empire
itself under  its last strong Emperor and its  last strong General and beat
it.

Then  it  faced  something   which  Hari  Seldon  could  not  foresee,  the
overwhelming power of a single human being, a Mutant. The creature known as
the  Mule was born  with the ability  to mold  men's emotions and  to shape
their minds.  His bitterest opponents were  made into his devoted servants.
Armies could  not,  would not fight  him. Before him,  the First Foundation
fell and Seldon's schemes lay partly in ruins.

There was left the  mysterious Second Foundation, the goal of all searches.
The  Mule must find  it to make  his conquest  of the Galaxy  complete. The
faithful of  what was left of  the First Foundation must  find it for quite
another reason. But where was it? That no one knew.

This,  then,  is  the  story  of  the  search for  the  Second  Foundation!

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                   PART I

                             SEARCH BY THE MULE

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                     1

                            Two Men and the Mule

THE  MULE   It  was  after  the  fall  of  the First  Foundation  that  the
constructive aspects  of the  Mule's regime took shape.  After the definite
break-up  at the  first  Galactic Empire,  it  was he  who first  presented
history with a unified volume at space truly imperial in scope. The earlier
commercial  empire at the  fallen Foundation  had been diverse  and loosely
knit, despite the impalpable  backing at the predictions of psycho-history.
It was  not to  be compared with  the tightly controlled  'Union of Worlds'
under the  Mule, comprising as it  did, one-tenth the volume  of the Galaxy
and  one-fifteenth of its  population. Particularly  during the era  of the
so-called Search....

ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA *

* All quotations from  the Encyclopedia Galactica here reproduced are taken
from the 116th Edition published in 1020 F.E. by the Encyclopedia Galactica
Publishing   Co.,   Terminus,    with   permission   of   the   publishers.

There is  much more that the Encyclopedia has to say  on the subject of the
Mule and  his Empire but  almost all of it  is not germane to  the issue at
immediate hand, and most  of it is considerably too dry for our purposes in
any  case. Mainly,  the  article concerns  itself  at this  point with  the
economic  conditions that  led to  the rise  of the  "First Citizen  of the
Union"   the Mule's  official title   and with the  economic consequences
thereof.

If,  at any time,  the writer of  the article  is mildly astonished  at the
colossal haste  with which the Mule  rose from nothing to  vast dominion in
five  years, he  conceals  it. If  he is  further  surprised at  the sudden
cessation of expansion in  favor of a five-year consolidation of territory,
he hides the fact.

We therefore abandon the  Encyclopedia and continue on our own path for our
own purposes and take up the history of the Great Interregnum  between the
First  and Second  Galactic  Empires   at the  end of  that five  years of
consolidation.

Politically, the Union is  quiet. Economically, it is prosperous. Few would
care to exchange the peace of the Mule's steady grip for the chaos that had
preceded,  On  the  worlds   that  five  years  previously  had  known  the
Foundation,  there   might  be  a  nostalgic   regret,  but  no  more.  The
Foundation's leaders were dead, where useless; and Converted, where useful.

And  of the  Converted, the  most useful  was Han Pritcher,  now lieutenant
general.

In the days of the Foundation, Han Pritcher had been a captain and a member
of the  underground Democratic Opposition. When  the Foundation fell to the
Mule  without a  fight, Pritcher fought  the Mule.  Until, that is,  he was
Converted.

The Conversion was not the ordinary one brought on by the power of superior
reason. Han Pritcher know that well enough. He had been changed because the
Mule  was  a mutant  with  mental  powers quite  capable  of adjusting  the
conditions  of ordinary  humans  to suit  himself. But  that  satisfied him
completely.  That  was as  it  should  be. The  very  contentment with  the
Conversion was  a prime symptom of it, but Han  Pritcher was no longer even
curious about the matter.

And  now that  he was returning  from his  fifth major expedition  into the
boundlessness  of  the Galaxy  outside  the  Union, it  was with  something
approaching artless  joy that  the veteran spaceman  and Intelligence agent
considered  his approaching  audience  with the  "First Citizen."  His hard
face, gouged out of  a dark, grainless wood that did not seem to be capable
of smiling  without cracking, didn't show it   but the outward indications
were  unnecessary. The  Mule  could see  the emotions  within, down  to the
smallest,  much as  an ordinary  man could  see the  twitch of  an eyebrow.

Pritcher left  his air  car at the  old vice-regal hangars  and entered the
palace  grounds on  foot  as was  required. He  walked  one mile  along the
arrowed highway   which was empty and silent.  Pritcher knew that over the
square miles  of Palace grounds, there was not  one guard, not one soldier,
not one armed man.

The Mule had need of no protection.

The Mule was his own best, all-powerful protector.

Pritcher's footsteps beat softly  in his own cars, as the palace reared its
gleaming, incredibly light and  incredibly strong metallic walls before him
in  the  daring,  overblown,  near-hectic  arches  that  characterized  the
architecture  of  the  Late  Empire. It  brooded  strongly  over the  empty
grounds, over the crowded city on the horizon.

Within the  palace was that one man  by himself   on whose inhuman mental
attributes  depended the new  aristocracy, and  the whole structure  of the
Union.

The huge,  smooth door swung massively open  at the general's approach, and
he  entered. He  stepped on to  the wide,  sweeping ramp that  moved upward
under him.  He rose swiftly in the noiseless  elevator. He stood before the
small  plain door  of the  Mule's own  room in  the highest glitter  of the
palace spires.

It opened

Bail  Channis was  young,  and Bail  Channis was  Unconverted. That  is, in
plainer language, his emotional make-up had been unadjusted by the Mule. It
remained  exactly  as it  had  been formed  by  the original  shape of  its
heredity  and the  subsequent  modifications of  his environment.  And that
satisfied him, too.

At not quite thirty, he was in marvelously good odor in the capital. He was
handsome  and  quick-witted    therefore  successful in  society.  He  was
intelligent and self-possessed  therefore successful with the Mule. And he
was thoroughly pleased at both successes.

And  now,  for the  first  time,  the Mule  had  summoned  him to  personal
audience.

His legs  carried him down the long, glittering  highway that led tautly to
the sponge-aluminum spires that  had been once the residence of the viceroy
of Kalgan,  who ruled under the  old emperors; and that  had been later the
residence  of the  independent Princes  of Kalgan,  who ruled in  their own
name; and that was now the residence of the First Citizen of the Union, who
ruled over an empire of his own.

Channis hummed softly to himself. He did not doubt what this was all about.
The  Second  Foundation,  naturally!  That all-embracing  bogey,  the  mere
consideration  of  which  had  thrown the  Mule  back  from  his policy  of
limitless  expansion   into  static  caution.  The   official  term  was  
"consolidation."

Now there were rumors  you couldn't stop rumors. The Mule was to begin the
offensive once more. The  Mule had discovered the whereabouts of the Second
Foundation, and  would attack  The Mule had  come to an  agreement with the
Second Foundation  and divided the Galaxy. The  Mule had decided the Second
Foundation   did  not   exist  and   would  take   over  all   the  Galaxy.

No use  listing all  the varieties one  heard in the anterooms.  It was not
even the first time such rumors had circulated. But now they seemed to have
more body  in them, and all  the free, expansive Souls  Who thrived on war,
military adventure, and political  chaos and withered in times of stability
and stagnant peace were joyful.

Bail  Channis was  one  of these.  He did  not  fear the  mysterious Second
Foundation. For  that matter, he did not fear the  Mule, and boasted of it.
Some, perhaps,  who disapproved  of one at  once so young  and so well-off,
waited darkly  for the reckoning with the gay  ladies' man who employed his
wit openly at the expense of the Mule's physical appearance and sequestered
life. None dared join him and few dared laugh, but when nothing happened to
him, his reputation rose accordingly.

Channis was  improvising words to  the tune he was  humming. Nonsense words
with the recurrent refrain: "Second Foundation threatens the Nation and all
of Creation."

He was at the palace.

The huge, smooth door  swung massively open at his approach and he entered.
He stepped  on to the wide,  sweeping ramp that moved  upward under him. He
rose swiftly  in the  noiseless elevator. He  stood before the  small plain
door of  the Mule's own room  in the highest glitter  of the palace spires.

It opened

The man who had  no name other than the Mule, and no title other than First
Citizen  looked out  through the  one-way transparency  of the wall  to the
light and lofty city on the horizon.

In the  darkening twilight, the stars  were emerging, and not  one but owed
allegiance to him.

He smiled with fleeting bitterness at the thought. The allegiance they owed
was to a personality few had ever seen.

He  was not  a man  to look at,  the Mule   not a  man to look  at without
derision. Not  more than  one hundred and  twenty pounds was  stretched out
into his five-foot-eight length. His limbs were bony stalks that jutted out
of his  scrawniness in graceless  angularity. And his thin  face was nearly
drowned out  in the  prominence of a  fleshy beak that  thrust three inches
outward.

Only his  eyes played  false with the  general farce that was  the Mule. In
their softness   a strange softness for  the Galaxy's greatest conqueror 
sadness was never entirely subdued.

In the  city was  to be found  all the gaiety  of a luxurious  capital on a
luxurious world.  He might have established  his capital on the Foundation,
the strongest of his  now-conquered enemies, but it was far out on the very
rim of the Galaxy. Kalgan, more centrally located, with a long tradition as
aristocracy's    playground,   suited    him   better       strategically.

But in its traditional  gaiety, enhanced by unheard-of prosperity, he found
no peace.

They feared  him and obeyed him  and, perhaps, even respected  him  from a
goodly distance. But who  could look at him without contempt? Only those he
had Converted.  And of what  value was their artificial  loyalty? It lacked
flavor.  He might  have adopted  titles, and  enforced ritual  and invented
elaborations,  but even  that would  have changed  nothing. Better   or at
least, no  worse   to be simply the  First Citizen  and  to hide himself.

There was a sudden surge of rebellion within him  strong and brutal. Not a
portion of  the Galaxy must be  denied him, For five  years he had remained
silent  and   buried  here  on  Kalgan   because  of  the  eternal,  misty,
space-ridden menace  of the unseen, unheard,  unknown Second Foundation. He
was thirty-two.  Not old  but  he felt old. His  body, whatever its mutant
mental powers, was physically weak.

Every star!  Every star  he could see   and every star he  couldnt see. It
must all be his!

Revenge on  all. On a  humanity of which he  wasn't a part. On  a Galaxy in
which he didn't fit.

The cool, overhead warning light flickered. He could follow the progress of
the  man who  had  entered the  palace, and  simultaneously, as  though his
mutant sense  had been enhanced  and sensitized in the  lonely twilight, he
felt  the  wash  of  emotional  content  touch  the fibers  of  his  brain.

He   recognized  the   identity  without   an  effort.  It   was  Pritcher.

Captain Pritcher  of the one-time Foundation.  The Captain Pritcher who had
been  ignored  and  passed   over  by  the  bureaucrats  of  that  decaying
government. The  Captain Pritcher whose job  as petty spy he  had wiped out
and whom  he had  lifted from its  slime. The Captain Pritcher  whom he had
made first  colonel and then general;  whose scope of activity  he had made
Galaxywide.

The now-General  Pritcher who  was, iron rebel though  he began, completely
loyal. And  yet with  all that, not  loyal because of  benefits gained, not
loyal out of gratitude, not loyal as a fair return  but loyal only through
the artifice of Conversion.

The Mule was conscious  of that strong unalterable surface layer of loyalty
and  love that  colored every  swirl and  eddy of  the emotionality  of Han
Pritcher   the  layer  he had  himself  implanted five  years before.  Far
underneath  there  were  the  original traces  of  stubborn  individuality,
impatience of rule, idealism   but even he, himself, could scarcely detect
them any longer.

The door  behind him  opened, and he  turned. The transparency  of the wall
faded  to opacity,  and the purple  evening light  gave way to  the whitely
blazing glow of atomic power.

Han  Pritcher  took  the  seat indicated.  There  was  neither bowing,  nor
kneeling nor the use  of honorifics in private audiences with the Mule. The
Mule was merely "First  Citizen." He was addressed as "sir." You sat in his
presence, and  you could turn your  back on him if  it so happened that you
did.

To Han  Pritcher this was all  evidence of the sure  and confident power of
the man. He was warmly satisfied with it.

The Mule said: "Your final report reached me yesterday. I can't deny that I
find it somewhat depressing, Pritcher."

The general's  eyebrows closed upon each other: "Yes, I  imagine so  but I
don't see to what other conclusions I could have come. There just isn't any
Second Foundation, sir."

Arid the  Mule considered  and then slowly  shook his head, as  he had done
many a  time before: "There's the  evidence of Ebling Mis.  There is always
the evidence of Ebling Mis."

It was not a  new story. Pritcher said without qualification: "Mis may have
been  the  greatest psychologist  of  the  Foundation, but  he  was a  baby
compared to  Hari Seldon. At the time  he was investigating Seldon's works,
he was under the  artificial stimulation of your own brain control. You may
have pushed him  too far. He might have been wrong. Sir,  he must have been
wrong."

The Mule sighed, his  lugubrious face thrust forward on its thin stalk of a
neck. "If only he  had lived another minute. He was on the point of telling
me where  the Second Foundation was.  He knew, I'm  telling you. I need not
have retreated. I need  not have waited and waited. So much time lost. Five
years gone for nothing."

Pritcher could not have been censorious over the weak longing of his ruler;
his  controlled  mental make-up  forbade  that. He  was disturbed  instead;
vaguely  uneasy.  He  said: "But  what  alternative  explanation can  there
possibly be,  sir? Five times I've gone out.  You yourself have plotted the
routes. And I've left  no asteroid unturned. It was three hundred years ago
that Hari  Seldon of the old  Empire supposedly established two Foundations
to act as nuclei  of a new Empire to replace the dying old one. One hundred
years after  Seldon, the First Foundation   the one we  know so well  was
known through all the  Periphery. One hundred fifty years after Seldon  at
the time  of the last battle with the old Empire   it was known throughout
the  Galaxy. And  now  it's three  hundred years    and where  should this
mysterious Second  be? In no eddy of the Galactic  stream has it been heard
of."

"Ebling Mis said it  kept itself secret. Only secrecy can turn its weakness
to strength."

"Secrecy as deep as this is past possibility without nonexistence as well."

The Mule looked up,  large eyes sharp and wary. "No. It does exist." A bony
finger pointed sharply. "There  is going to be a slight change in tactics."

Pritcher frowned. "You plan to leave yourself? I would scarcely advise it."

"No, of course not. You will have to go out once again  one last time. But
with another in joint command."

There  was   a  silence,  and  Pritcher's   voice  was  hard,  "Who,  Sir?"

"There's a young man here in Kalgan. Bail Channis."

"I've never heard of him, Sir."

"No, I imagine  not. But he's got an agile mind, he's  ambitious  and he's
not Converted."

Pritcher's  long  jaw trembled  for  a bare  instant,  "I fail  to see  the
advantage in that."

"There is one, Pritcher. You're a resourceful and experienced man. You have
given me good service.  But you are Converted. Your motivation is simply an
enforced  and  helpless  loyalty  to  myself.  When you  lost  your  native
motivations, you lost something,  some subtle drive, that I cannot possibly
replace."

"I don't feel that, Sir," said Pritcher grimly. "I recall myself quite well
as  I was  in  the days  when I  was  an enemy  of yours.  I feel  none the
inferior."

"Naturally not," and the Mules mouth twitched into a smile. "Your judgment
in this matter is scarcely objective. This Channis, now, is ambitious  for
himself. He  is completely trustworthy  out of  no loyalty but to himself.
He knows that it  is on my coattails that he rides and he would do anything
to  increase my  power that  the ride might  be long  and far and  that the
destination  might be  glorious. If he  goes with  you, there is  just that
added push behind his seeking  that push for himself.'

"Then," said Pritcher. still  insistent, "why not remove my own Conversion,
if  you think  that will improve  me. I  can scarcely be  mistrusted, now."

"That never, Pritcher. While  you are within arm's reach, or blaster reach,
of myself, you will  remain firmly held in Conversion. If I were to release
you this minute, I would be dead the next."

The  general's nostrils  flared.  "I am  hurt  that you  should think  so."

"I don't  mean to  hurt you, but it  is impossible for you  to realize what
your feelings  would be if free to form themselves  along the lines of your
natural  motivation. The  human  mind resents  control. The  ordinary human
hypnotist cannot  hypnotize a  person against his  will for that  reason. I
can, because I'm not a hypnotist, and, believe me, Pritcher, the resentment
that  you cannot  show  and do  not even  know you  possess is  something I
wouldn't want to face."

Pritcher's head bowed. Futility  wrenched him and left him gray and haggard
inside. He  said with an effort,  "But how can you  trust this man. I mean,
completely  as you can trust me in my Conversion."

"Well, I  suppose I can't entirely.  That is why you  must go with him. You
see, Pritcher,"  and the Mule buried himself  in the large armchair against
the soft back of  which he looked like an angularly animated toothpick, "if
he should stumble on the Second Foundation  if it should occur to him that
an  arrangement with  them  might be  more profitable  than  with me   You
understand?"

A profoundly  satisfied light  blazed in Pritcher's eyes.  "That is better,
Sir."

"Exactly.  But remember,  he must  have a  free rein  as far  as possible."

"Certainly."

"And ... uh ... Pritcher. The young man is handsome, pleasant and extremely
charming.  Don't  let  him  fool you.  He's  a  dangerous and  unscrupulous
character.  Don't  get  in  his way  unless  you're  prepared  to meet  him
properly. That's all."

The Mule  was alone  again. He let the  lights die and the  wall before him
kicked to  transparency again. The sky  was purple now, and  the city was a
smudge of light on the horizon.

What was  it all  for? And if  he were the  master of all there  was  what
then? Would it really stop men like Pritcher. from being straight and tall,
self-confident, strong? Would Bail Channis lose his looks? Would he himself
be other than he was?

He cursed his doubts. What was he really after?

The cool, overhead warning light flickered. He could follow the progress of
the man  who had entered the  palace and, almost against  his will, he felt
the  soft  wash  of  emotional  content  touch  the fibers  of  his  brain.

He recognized the identity without an effort. It was Channis. Here the Mule
saw no uniformity, but  the primitive diversity of a strong mind, untouched
and unmolded  except by  the manifold disorganizations of  the Universe. It
writhed  in floods  and waves. There  was caution  on the surface,  a thin,
smoothing effect, but with touches of cynical ribaldry in the hidden eddies
of  it. And  underneath  there was  the  strong flow  of self-interest  and
self-love, with  a gush  of cruel humor  here and there, and  a deep, still
pool of ambition underlying all.

The Mule felt that  he could reach out and dam the current, wrench the pool
from its  basin and  turn it in another  course, dry up one  flow and begin
another.  But what  of  it? If  he could  bend Channis  curly head  in the
profoundest adoration, would that change his own grotesquerie that made him
shun the  day and love the night, that made him  a recluse inside an empire
that was unconditionally big?

The door  behind him  opened, and he  turned. The transparency  of the wall
faded to opacity, and the darkness gave way to the whitely blazing artifice
of atomic power.

Bail  Channis sat down  lightly and  said: "This is  a not-quite-unexpected
honor, sir."

The Mule  rubbed his proboscis with all four fingers  at once and sounded a
bit irritable in his response. "Why so, young man?"

"A hunch,  I suppose.  Unless I want  to admit that I've  been listening to
rumors."

"Rumors? Which  one of the  several dozen varieties are  you referring to?"

"Those that say a renewal of the Galactic Offensive is being planned. It is
a  hope with  me that  such is true  and that  I might play  an appropriate
part."

"Then you think there is a Second Foundation?"

"Why   not?   It   would   make   things   so   much   more   interesting."

"And you find interest in it as well?"

"Certainly. In  the very mystery of it! What  better subject could you find
for conjecture? The newspaper supplements are full of nothing else lately 
which is  probably significant. The  Cosmos had one of  its feature writers
compose a  weirdie about  a world consisting  of beings of pure  mind  the
Second Foundation,  you see   who had  developed mental force  to energies
large  enough to  compete with  any known  to physical  science. Spaceships
could be  blasted light-years  away, planets could  be turned out  of their
orbits--"

"Interesting.  Yes. But  do  you have  any notions  on the subject?  Do you
subscribe to this mind-power notion?'

"Galaxy,  no! Do  you think  creatures like  that would  stay on  their own
planet? No, sir. I think the Second Foundation remains hidden because it is
weaker than we think."

"In that case, I can explain myself very easily. How would you like to head
an expedition to locate the Second Foundation?"

For a moment Channis  seemed caught up by the sudden rush of events at just
a little greater speed  than he was prepared for. His tongue had apparently
skidded to a halt in a lengthening silence.

The Mule said dryly: "Well?"

Channis corrugated his forehead. "Certainly. But where am I to go? Have you
any information available?"

"General Pritcher will be with you"

"Then I'm not to head it?"

"Judge for  yourself when I'm  done. Listen, you're not  of the Foundation.
You're a  native of Kalgan, aren't you? Yes.  Well, then, your knowledge of
the Seldon  plan may be vague. When the  first Galactic Empire was falling,
Hari Seldon and a group of psychohistorians, analyzing the future course of
history  by  mathematical tools  no  longer available  in these  degenerate
times, set up two Foundations, one at each end of the Galaxy, in such a way
that the economic and  sociological forces that were slowly evolving, would
make them  serve as  foci for the  Second Empire. Hari Seldon  planned on a
thousand years to accomplish that  and it would have taken thirty thousand
without the Foundations. But  he couldn't count on me. I  am a mutant and I
am  unpredictable by  psychohistory which  can only  deal with  the average
reactions of numbers. Do you understand?"

"Perfectly, sir. But how does that involve me?'

"You'll understand  shortly. I intend to  unite the Galaxy now   and reach
Seldon's thousand-year goal in three hundred. One Foundation  the world of
physical scientists  is  still flourishing, under me. Under the prosperity
and order of the  Union, the atomic weapons they have developed are capable
of  dealing  with  anything  in the  Galaxy    except  perhaps the  Second
Foundation.  So I  must  know more  about it.  General  Pritcher is  of the
definite  opinion  that  it  does not  exist  at  all.  I know  otherwise."

Channis said delicately: "How do you know, sir?"

And the Mule's words were suddenly liquid indignation: "Because minds under
my control have been interfered with. Delicately! Subtly! But not so subtly
that I couldn't notice. And these interferences are increasing, and hitting
valuable  men  at  important  times.  Do  you  wonder now  that  a  certain
discretion has kept me motionless these years?

"That is  your importance. General Pritcher is the best  man left me, so he
is  no  longer  safe.  Of course,  he  does  not  know  that.  But you  are
Unconverted and therefore not instantly detectable as a Mule's man. You may
fool the  Second Foundation longer than  one of my own  men would  perhaps
just sufficiently longer. Do you understand?"

"Um-m-m. Yes.  But pardon me, sir, if I question you.  How are these men of
yours disturbed, so that I might detect change in General Pritcher, in case
any  occurs.  Are  they   Unconverted  again?  Do  they  become  disloyal?"

"No. I told you  it was subtle. It's more disturbing than that, because its
harder  to detect  and sometimes  I have  to wait before  acting, uncertain
whether  a key  man is being  normally erratic  or has been  tampered with.
Their loyalty is left  intact, but initiative and ingenuity are rubbed out.
I'm  left with a  perfectly normal  person, apparently, but  one completely
useless. In  the last  year, six have been  so treated. Six of  my best." A
corner of his mouth  lifted. "They're in charge of training bases now  and
my most earnest wishes go with them that no emergencies come up for them to
decide upon."

"Suppose, sir  ... suppose  it were not  the Second Foundation.  What if it
were another, such as yourself  another mutant?"

"The planning  is too careful, too  long range. A single  man would be in a
greater hurry. No, it  is a world, and you are to be my weapon against it."

Channis'  eyes   shone  as   he  said:  "I'm  delighted   at  the  chance."

But  the  Mule  caught  the  sudden  emotional upwelling.  He  said:  "Yes,
apparently it occurs to you, that you will perform a unique service, worthy
of a unique reward  perhaps even that of being my successor. Quite so. But
there are  unique punishments,  too, you know. My  emotional gymnastics are
not confined to the creation of loyalty alone."

And the  little smile on his  thin lips was grim,  as Channis leaped out of
his seat in horror.

For just an instant,  just one, flashing instant, Channis had felt the pang
of  an  overwhelming grief  close  over him.  It  had slammed  down with  a
physical pain that had  blackened his mind unbearably, and then lifted. Now
nothing was left but the strong wash of anger.

The Mule said: "Anger won't help ... yes, you're covering it up now, aren't
you? But I can see it. So just remember  that sort of business can be made
more intense and kept up. I've killed men by emotional control, and there's
no death crueler."

He paused: "That's all!"

The Mule  was alone  again. He let the  lights die and the  wall before him
kicked to transparency again. The sky was black, and the rising body of the
Galactic Lens  was spreading its bespanglement  across the velvet depths of
space.

All that  haze of nebula was  a mass of stars  so numerous that they melted
one   into  the   other   and  left   nothing   but  a   cloud  of   light.

And all to be his

And  now   but  one  last   arrangement  to  make,  and   he  could  sleep.

                              FIRST INTERLUDE

The Executive  Council of the Second Foundation was  in session. To us they
are merely voices. Neither  the exact scene of the meeting nor the identity
of those present are essential at the point.

Nor, strictly  speaking, can we even consider  an exact reproduction of any
part  of the  session   unless we  wish to  sacrifice completely  even the
minimum comprehensibility we have a right to expect.

We deal here with psychologists  and not merely psychologists. Let us say,
rather,  scientists with  a psychological  orientation. That is,  men whose
fundamental conception  of scientific philosophy is  pointed in an entirely
different direction from all  of the orientations we know. The "psychology"
of scientists  brought up  among the axioms deduced  from the observational
habits of physical science has only the vaguest relationship to PSYCHOLOGY.

Which is about as far as I can go in explaining color to a blind man  with
myself as blind as the audience.

The point being made  is that the minds assembled understood thoroughly the
workings  of each  other, not only  by general  theory but by  the specific
application over a long period of these theories to particular individuals.
Speech as  known to us was  unnecessary. A fragment of  a sentence amounted
almost to long-winded redundancy. A gesture, a grunt, the curve of a facial
line    even  a significantly  timed  pause  yielded informational  juice.

The liberty  is taken, therefore, of freely  translating a small portion of
the conference  into the extremely specific  word-combinations necessary to
minds oriented from childhood to a physical science philosophy, even at the
risk of losing the more delicate nuances.

There  was one  "voice" predominant,  and that  belonged to  the individual
known simply as the First Speaker.

He said:  "It is apparently quite definite now as  to what stopped the Mule
in his first mad rush. I can't say that the matter reflects credit upon ...
well, upon the organization of the situation. Apparently, he almost located
us, by means of  the artificially heightened brain-energy of what they call
a 'psychologist' on the First Foundation. This psychologist was killed just
before he  could communicate his discovery to  the Mule. The events leading
to that killing were completely fortuitous for all calculations below Phase
Three. Suppose you take over."

It was  the Fifth Speaker who was indicated by  an inflection of the voice.
He said, in grim nuances: "It is certain that the situation was mishandled.
We  are, of course,  highly vulnerable  under mass attack,  particularly an
attack led by such  a mental phenomenon as the Mule. Shortly after he first
achieved Galactic eminence with  the conquest of the First Foundation, half
a year  after to be exact,  he was on Trantor.  Within another half year he
would have been here and the odds would have been stupendously against us 
96.3  plus or  minus 0.05%  to be  exact. We  have spent  considerable time
analyzing the forces that stopped him. We know, of course, what was driving
him on  so in the first  place. The internal ramifications  of his physical
deformity and  mental uniqueness are obvious to all  of us. However, it was
only through penetration to Phase Three that we could determine  after the
fact   tbe possibility of his anomalous action  in the presence of another
human being who had an honest affection for him.

"And since such an  anomalous action would depend upon the presence of such
another  human being  at  the appropriate  time, to  that extent  the whole
affair  was fortuitous.  Our agents  are certain  that it  was a  girl that
killed the Mule's psychologist  a girl for whom the Mule felt trust out of
sentiment,  and  whom he,  therefore,  did  not control  mentally   simply
because she liked him.

"Since  that event   and for  those who  want the details,  a mathematical
treatment of the subject  has been drawn up for the Central Library  which
warned us,  we have held the  Mule off by unorthodox  methods with which we
daily   risk   SeIdon's   entire  scheme   of   history.   That  is   all."

The First  Speaker paused an instant to  allow the individuals assembled to
absorb  the  full implications.  He  said:  "The situation  is then  highly
unstable. With Seldon's original  scheme bent to the fracture point  and I
must emphasize  that we have blundered  badly in this whole  matter, in our
horrible lack of foresight  we are faced with an irreversible breakdown of
the Plan. Time is passing us by. I think there is only one solution left us
 and even that is risky.

"We must allow the Mule to find us  in a sense."

Another pause,  in which he gathered the reactions, then:  "I repeat  in a
sense!"

                                     2

                          Two Men without the Mule

The ship  was in  near-readiness. Nothing lacked, but  the destination. The
Mule had suggested a  return to Trantor  the world that was the bulk of an
incomparable  Galactic metropolis  of  the hugest  Empire mankind  had ever
known    the  dead   world  that  had  been  capital  of  all  the  stars.

Pritcher disapproved. It was an old path  sucked dry.

He found Bail Channis  in the ship's navigation room. The young man's curly
hair was just sufficiently  disheveled to allow a single curl to droop over
the forehead   as if it  had been carefully placed  there  and even teeth
showed in a smile  that matched it. Vaguely, the stiff officer felt himself
harden against the other.

Channis' excitement  was evident,  "Pritcher, it's too  far a coincidence."

The general  said coldly: "Im  not aware of the  subject of conversation."

"Oh Well, then drag  up a chair, old man, and lets get into it. I've been
going over your notes. I find them excellent."

"How ... pleasant that you do."

"But Im wondering if  you've come to the conclusions I have. Have you ever
tried analyzing the problem deductively? I mean, it's all very well to comb
the stars  at random, and to  have done all you  did in five expeditions is
quite a  bit of star-hopping.  That's obvious. But have  you calculated how
long  it  would  take  to go  through  every  known  world  at this  rate?"

"Yes. Several times," Pritcher  felt no urge to meet the young man halfway,
but there  was the  importance of filching  the other's mind   the other's
uncontrolled, and hence, unpredictable, mind.

"Well, then, suppose we're  analytical about it and try to decide just what
we're looking for?"

"The Second Foundation," said Pritcher, grimly.

"A  Foundation of psychologists,"  corrected Channis,  "who are is  weak in
physical  science as  the First  Foundation was  weak in  psychology. Well,
you're  from the  First  Foundation, which  I'm not.  The  implications are
probably  obvious to you.  We must find  a world  which rules by  virtue of
mental   skills,  and   yet  which   is  very   backwards  scientifically."

"Is that necessarily so?"  questioned Pritcher, quietly. "Our own Union of
Worlds'  isn't backwards  scientifically,  even though  our ruler  owes his
strength to his mental powers."

"Because he has the  skills of the First Foundation to draw upon," came the
slightly  impatient  answer,  "and  that  is  the only  such  reservoir  of
knowledge  in the  Galaxy. The  Second Foundation  must live among  the dry
crumbs  of  the  broken  Galactic Empire.  There  are  no pickings  there."

"So then you postulate mental power sufficient to establish their rule over
a group of worlds and physical helplessness as well?"

"Comparative physical helplessness. Against the decadent neighboring areas,
they are  competent to  defend themselves. Against the  resurgent forces of
the  Mule, with  his  background of  a mature  atomic economy,  they cannot
stand. Else, why is their location so well-hidden, both at the start by the
founder, Hari Seldon, and now by themselves. Your own First Foundation made
no secret  of its  existence and did not  have it made for  them, when they
were an undefended single city on a lonely planet three hundred years ago."

The smooth  lines of  Pritcher's dark face twitched  sardonically. 'And now
that you've  finished your deep analysis, would you like  a list of all the
kingdoms, republics, planet states and dictatorships of one sort or another
in that political wilderness  out there that correspond to your description
and to several factors besides?"

"All this  has been considered  then?" Channis lost none  of his brashness.

"You won't  find it  here, naturally, but  we have a  completely worked out
guide to  the political  units of the  Opposing Periphery. Really,  did you
suppose the Mule would work entirely hit-and-miss?"

"Well, then" and the  young man's voice rose in a burst of energy, "what of
the Oligarchy of Tazenda?"

Pritcher touched  his ear  thoughtfully, "Tazenda? Oh,  I think I  know it.
They're  not in the  Periphery, are they?  It seems  to me they're  fully a
third of the way towards the center of the Galaxy."

"Yes. What of that?"

"The records  we have place the  Second Foundation at the  other end of the
Galaxy.  Space knows  it's the  only thing we  have to  go on. Why  talk of
Tazenda anyway?  Its angular deviation from  the First Foundation radian is
only about  one hundred ten  to one hundred twenty  degrees anyway. Nowhere
near one hundred eighty."

"There's  another   point  in  the  records.   The  Second  Foundation  was
established at 'Star's End.'"

"No such region in the Galaxy has ever been located."

"Because  it was  a local  name, suppressed  later for greater  secrecy. Or
maybe one  invented for  the purpose by  Seldon and his  group. Yet there's
some  relationship between  'Star's End'  and 'Tazenda, don't  you think?"

"A vague similarity in sound? Insufficient."

'Have you ever been there?"

"No."

"Yet it is mentioned in your records."

"Where? Oh,  yes, but that was merely to take on  food and water. There was
certainly nothing remarkable about the world."

"Did  you   land  at   the  ruling  planet?  The   center  of  government?"

"I couldn't possibly say."

Channis brooded about it under the other's cold gaze. Then, "Would you look
at the Lens with me for a moment?"

"Certainly."

The Lens was perhaps the newest feature of the interstellar cruisers of the
day. Actually,  it was a complicated  calculating machine which could throw
on a screen a reproduction of the night sky as seen from any given point of
the Galaxy.

Channis adjusted  the co-ordinate points  and the wall lights  of the pilot
room were  extinguished. In the dim  red light at the  control board of the
Lens, Channis'  face glowed ruddily.  Pritcher sat in the  pilot seat, long
legs crossed, face lost in the gloom.

Slowly, as  the induction period passed, the  points of light brightened on
the  screen.  And then  they  were  thick and  bright  with the  generously
populated star-groupings of the Galaxy's center.

"This," explained  Channis, "is the winter  night-sky as seen from Trantor.
That is  the important point that, as far as I  know, has been neglected so
far in your search.  All intelligent orientation must start from Trantor as
zero point.  Trantor was the capital  of the Galactic Empire.  Even more so
scientifically  and  culturally,  than  politically.  And,  therefore,  the
significance of  any descriptive name  should stem, nine times  out of ten,
from  a Trantorian  orientation. You'll  remember in this  connection that,
although Seldon  was from Helicon, towards  the Periphery, his group worked
on Trantor itself."

"What is it you're trying to show me?" Pritcher's level voice plunged icily
into the gathering enthusiasm of the other.

"The map  will explain it. Do  you see the dark  nebula?" The shadow of his
arm fell  upon the screen, which  took on the bespanglement  of the Galaxy.
The pointing  finger ended on a  tiny patch of black  that seemed a hole in
the speckled fabric of  light. "The stellagraphical records call it Pelot's
Nebula. Watch it. I'm going to expand the image."

Pritcher had  watched the phenomenon of Lens  Image expansion before but he
still caught his breath.  It was like being at the visiplate of a spaceship
storming through a horribly crowded Galaxy without entering hyperspace. The
stars  diverged towards  them  from a  common center,  flared  outwards and
tumbled  off the  edge  of the  screen. Single  points became  double, then
globular.  Hazy  patches  dissolved into  myriad  points.  And always  that
illusion of motion.

Channis spoke  through it all, "You'll notice that  we are moving along the
direct line from Trantor  to Pelot's Nebula, so that in effect we are still
looking at  a stellar orientation  equivalent to that of  Trantor. There is
probably a  slight error because of the gravitic  deviation of light that I
haven't the  math to calculate for, but I'm  sure it can't be significant."

The darkness  was spreading over  the screen. As the  rate of magnification
slowed, the  stars slipped off the  four ends of the  screen in a regretful
leave-taking. At the rims  of the growing nebula, the brilliant universe of
stars shone abruptly in token for that light which was merely hidden behind
the swirling  unradiating atom fragments of  sodium and calcium that filled
cubic parsecs of space.

And  Channis  pointed again,  "This  has  been called  'The  Mouth' by  the
inhabitants of that region  of space. And that is significant because it is
only from  the Trantorian orientation that it looks  like a mouth." What he
indicated  was a  rift in  the body  of the  Nebula, shaped like  a ragged,
grinning mouth  in profile, outlined by the  glazing glory of the starlight
with which it was filled.

"Follow The  Mouth.'" said Channis. "Follow  'The Mouth' towards the gullet
as it narrows down to a thin, splintering line of light.

Again the  screen expanded a  trifle, until the Nebula  stretched away from
"The  Mouth"  to block  off  all the  screen  but that  narrow trickle  and
Channis' finger silently followed it down, to where it straggled to a halt,
and then, as his finger continued moving onward, to a spot where one single
star sparked  lonesomely; and there his finger  halted, for beyond that was
blackness, unrelieved.

"'Star's End,'"  said the young man,  simply. "The fabric of  the Nebula is
thin there  and the  light of that one  star finds its way  through in just
that one direction  to shine on Trantor."

"You're tying  to tell  me that" the  voice of the Mule's  general died in
suspicion.

"I'm not trying. That is Tazenda  Star's End."

The lights went on. The Lens flicked off. Pritcher reached Channis in three
long strides, "What made you think of this?"

And Channis  leaned back in his chair with  a queerly puzzled expression on
his  face. "It  was accidental.  I'd like  to take intellectual  credit for
this, but it was only accidental. In any case, however it happens, it fits.
According to our references, Tazenda is an oligarchy. It rules twenty-seven
inhabited planets.  It is not advanced scientifically.  And most of all, it
is an  obscure world that has  adhered to a strict  neutrality in the local
politics of that stellar  region, and is not expansionist. I think we ought
to see it."

"Have you informed the Mule of this?"

"No.  Nor shall  we.  We're in  space now,  about to  make the  first hop."

Pritcher, in  sudden horror,  sprang to the  visiplate. Cold space  met his
eyes  when he  adjusted  it. He  gazed fixedly  at  the view,  then turned.
Automatically, his hand reached for the hard, comfortable curve of the butt
of his blaster.

"By whose order?"

"By my  order, general"  it was the  first time Channis had  ever used the
other's  title  "while I  was  engaging  you here.  You  probably felt  no
acceleration, because  it came at the  moment I was expanding  the field of
the Lens and you  undoubtedly imagined it to be an illusion of the apparent
star motion."

"Why? Just  what are you doing?  What was the point  of your nonsense about
Tazenda, then?"

"That was no nonsense. I was completely serious. We're going there. We left
today because we were  scheduled to leave three days from now. General, you
don't  believe there  is  a Second  Foundation, and  I do.  You  are merely
following the  Mule's orders  without faith; I recognize  a serious danger.
The  Second Foundation  has  now had  five  years to  prepare. How  they've
prepared, I don't know,  but what if they have agents on Kalgan. If I carry
about in my mind the knowledge of the whereabouts of the Second Foundation,
they may discover that. My life might be no longer safe, and I have a great
affection for my life.  Even on a thin and remote possibility such as that,
I would rather play safe. So no one knows of Tazenda but you, and you found
out only after we  were out in space. And even so, there is the question of
the  crew." Channis  was smiling  again, ironically, in  obviously complete
control of the situation.

Pritcher's  hand fell  away  from his  blaster, and  for  a moment  a vague
discomfort pierced him. What kept him from action? What deadened him? There
was a  time when  he was a  rebellious and unpromoted captain  of the First
Foundation's commercial empire, when it would have been himself rather than
Channis who would have taken prompt and daring action such as that. Was the
Mule right? Was his  controlled mind so concerned with obedience as to lose
initiative? He felt a  thickening despondency drive him down into a strange
lassitude.

He  said, "Well  done! However, you  will consult  me in the  future before
making decisions of this nature."

The flickering signal caught his attention.

"That's the  engine room," said Channis, casually.  "They warmed up on five
minutes' notice  and I asked them to let me know  if there was any trouble.
Want to hold the fort?"

Pritcher nodded mutely, and cogitated in the sudden loneliness on the evils
of approaching fifty. The  visiplate was sparsely starred. The main body of
the Galaxy  misted one end. What  if he were free  of the Mule's influence

But he recoiled in horror at the thought.

Chief  Engineer Huxlani looked  sharply at  the young, ununiformed  man who
carried himself with the assurance of a Fleet officer and seemed to be in a
position of  authority. Huxlani, as a  regular Fleet man from  the days his
chin had dripped milk, generally confused authority with specific insignia.

But the Mule had  appointed this man, and the Mule was, of course, the last
word.  The  only word  for  that  matter. Not  even  subconsciously did  he
question that. Emotional control went deep.

He handed Channis the little oval object without a word.

Channis hefted it, and smiled engagingly.

"You're a Foundation man, aren't you, chief?"

"Yes, sir. I served in the Foundation Fleet eighteen years before the First
Citizen took over."

"Foundation training in engineering?"

"Qualified  Technician,   First  Class    Central   School  on  Anacreon."

"Good  enough. And  you found  this on  the communication circuit,  where I
asked you to look?"

"Yes, Sir."

"Does it belong there?"

"No, Sir."

"Then what is it?"

"A hypertracer, sir."

"That's   not   enough.  I'm   not   a   Foundation  man.   What  is   it?"

"It's  a  device  to  allow the  ship  to  be  traced through  hyperspace."

"In other words we can be followed anywhere."

"Yes, Sir."

"All right.  It's a recent invention, isn't it? It  was developed by one of
the  Research  Institutes  set   up  by  the  First  Citizen,  wasn't  it?"

"I believe so, Sir."

"And its workings are a government secret. Right?"

"I, believe so, Sir."

"Yet here it is. Intriguing."

Channis tossed  the hypertracer  methodically from hand  to hand for  a few
seconds. Then,  sharply, he  held it out,  "Take it, then, and  put it back
exactly where  you found it and  exactly how you found  it. Understand? And
then forget this incident. Entirely!"

The chief  choked down his near-automatic  salute, turned sharply and left.

The ship  bounded through  the Galaxy, its  path a wide-spaced  dotted line
through the  stars. The dots, referred to, were  the scant stretches of ten
to sixty light-seconds spent in normal space and between them stretched the
hundred-and-up  light-year   gaps  that  represented   the  "hops"  through
hyperspace.

Bail  Channis sat  at  the control  panel of  the Lens  and felt  again the
involuntary   surge   of  near-worship   at   the   contemplation  of   it.

He was not  a Foundation man and the interplay of forces  at the twist of a
knob  or  the  breaking  of  a  contact  was  not  second  nature  to  him.

Not that  the Lens  ought quite to  bore even a Foundation  man. Within its
unbelievably  compact body  were enough  electronic circuits to  pin- point
accurately a  hundred million separate stars  in exact relationship to each
other. And as if  that were not a feat in itself, it was further capable of
translating any given portion  of the Galactic Field along any of the three
spatial  axes  or to  rotate  any  portion of  the  Field  about a  center.

It was  because of that, that  the Lens had performed  a near-revolution in
interstellar  travel.  In  the younger  days  of  interstellar travel,  the
calculation of each "hop"  through hyperspace meant any amount of work from
a day to a  week  and the larger portion of such work was the more or less
precise  calculation  of  "Ship's   Position"  on  the  Galactic  scale  of
reference.  Essentially that  meant  the accurate  observation of  at least
three  widely-spaced stars, the  position of  which, with reference  to the
arbitrary Galactic triple-zero, were known.

And it  is the word  "known," that is the  catch. To any who  know the star
field well  from one  certain reference point,  stars are as  individual as
people.  Jump  ten  parsecs,   however,  and  not  even  your  own  sun  is
recognizable. It may not even be visible.

The answer was, of  course, spectroscopic analysis. For centuries, the main
object  of  interstellar  engineering   was  the  analysis  of  the  "light
signature" of more and more stars in greater and greater detail. With this,
and the  growing precision of  the "hop" itself, standard  routes of travel
through the  Galaxy were adopted and interstellar  travel became less of an
art and more of a science.

And yet, even under the Foundation with improved calculating machines and a
new  method of  mechanically  scanning the  star field  for a  known "light
signature," it sometimes took days to locate three stars and then calculate
position   in    regions   not   previously   familiar    to   the   pilot.

It was  the Lens  that changed all that.  For one thing it  required only a
single known  star. For  another, even a  space tyro such  as Channis could
operate it.

The nearest  sizable star at  the moment was Vincetori,  according to "hop"
calculations, and on the visiplate now, a bright star was centered. Channis
hoped that it was Vincetori.

The field screen of the Lens was thrown directly next that of the visiplate
and  with  careful  fingers,   Channis  punched  out  the  co-ordinates  of
Vincetori. He closed a  relay, and the star field sprang to bright view. In
it,  too,  a  bright  star was  centered,  but  otherwise  there seemed  no
relationship. He adjusted the  Lens along the Z-Axis and expanded the Field
to  where  the  photometer  showed  both  centered  stars to  be  of  equal
brightness.

Channis  looked for  a second  star, sizably  bright, on the  visiplate and
found one on the  field screen to correspond. Slowly, he rotated the screen
to similar angular deflection. He twisted his mouth and rejected the result
with a  grimace. Again he rotated and another  bright star was brought into
position,  and  a third.  And  then  he grinned.  That  did  it. Perhaps  a
specialist with  trained relationship  perception might have  clicked first
try, but he'd settle for three.

That was  the adjustment. In the final step,  the two fields overlapped and
merged  into a  sea of  not-quite-rightness. Most  of the stars  were close
doubles. But the fine adjustment did not take long. The double stars melted
together, one  field remained, and the "Ship's  Position" could now be read
directly off  the dials. The entire  procedure had taken less  than half an
hour.

Channis found  Han Pritcher in his private  quarters. The general was quite
apparently preparing for bed. He looked up.

"News?"

"Not particularly. Well be at Tazenda in another hop."

"I know."

"I  don't want  to bother  you if  you're turning  in, but have  you looked
through the film we picked up in Cil?"

Han Pritcher  cast a disparaging look at the  article in question, where it
lay in its black case upon his low bookshelf, "Yes."

"And what do you think?"

"I think  that if there was ever any science to  History, it has been quite
lost in this region of the Galaxy."

Channis grinned  broadly, "I know what you  mean. Rather barren, isn't it?"

"Not if  you enjoy  personal chronicles of rulers.  Probably unreachable, I
should   say,   in  both   directions.   Where   history  concerns   mainly
personalities, the  drawings become either black  or white according to the
interests   of   the   writer.  I   find   it   all  remarkably   useless."

"But there  is talk about Tazenda. That's the point I  tried to make when I
gave  you the  film. It's  the only  one I  could find that  even mentioned
them."

"All right. They have good rulers and bad. They've conquered a few planets,
won some  battles, lost a few.  There is nothing distinctive  about them. I
don't think much of your theory, Channis."

"But you've  missed a few points. Didn't you  notice that they never formed
coalitions? They  always remained  completely outside the  politics of this
corner of  the star  swarm. As you  say, they conquered a  few planets, but
then they  stopped  and that without  any startling defeat of consequence.
It's  just as  if they  spread out  enough to  protect themselves,  but not
enough to attract attention."

"Very  well,"  came  the  unemotional response.  "I  have  no objection  to
landing. At the worst  a little lost time."

"Oh, no.  At the worst   complete defeat. If it  is the Second Foundation.
Remember   it   would   be   a  world   of   space-knows-how-many   Mules."

"What do you plan to do?"

"Land  on some  minor  subject planet.  Find out  as much  as we  can about
Tazenda first, then improvise from that."

"All right.  No objection.  If you don't mind  now, I would  like the light
out."

Channis left with a wave of his hand.

And in  the darkness of a  tiny room in an island  of driving metal lost in
the vastness  of space, General Han  Pritcher remained awake, following the
thoughts that led him through such fantastic reaches.

If everything he had so painfully decided were true  and how all the facts
were beginning  to fit  then Tazenda was  the Second Foundation. There was
no way out. But how? How?

Could it  be Tazenda?  An ordinary world?  One without distinction?  A slum
lost amid  the wreckage  of an Empire?  A splinter among  the fragments? He
remembered,  as from  a distance,  the Mule's  shriveled face and  his thin
voice as  he used to speak of the  old Foundation psychologist, Ebling Mis,
the one man who  had  maybe  learned the secret of the Second Foundation.

Pritcher  recalled  the  tension  of  the  Mule's  words:  "It  was  as  if
astonishment  had overwhelmed  Mis. It  was as  though something  about the
Second  Foundation had  surpassed  all his  expectations, had  driven  in a
direction completely different from  what he might have assumed. If I could
only have read his thoughts rather than his emotions. Yet the emotions were
plain      and   above   everything   else  was   this   vast   surprise."

Surprise  was the  keynote. Something  supremely astonishing! And  now came
this  boy, this  grinning youngster,  glibly joyful  about Tazenda  and its
undistinguished subnormality. And he had to be right. He had to. Otherwise,
nothing made sense.

Pritcher's last conscious thought had a touch of grimness. That hypertracer
along the  Etheric tube was still  there. He had checked  it one hour back,
with Channis well out of the way.

                              SECOND INTERLUDE

It was a casual meeting in the anteroom of the Council Chamber  just a few
moments before passing into  the Chamber to take up the business of the day
 and the few thoughts flashed back and forth quickly.

"So the Mule is on his way."

"That's what I hear, too. Risky! Mighty risky!"

"Not if affairs adhere to the functions set up."

"The Mule  is not an ordinary  man  and it  is difficult to manipulate his
chosen  instruments  without detection  by  him. The  controlled minds  are
difficult  to   touch.  They   say  he's  caught   on  to  a   few  cases."

"Yes, I don't see how that can be avoided."

"Uncontrolled minds  are easier. But  so few are in  positions of authority
under him"

They entered  the Chamber.  Others of the Second  Foundation followed them.

                                     3

                           Two Men and a Peasant

Rossem  is  one of  those  marginal  worlds usually  neglected in  Galactic
history and  scarcely ever obtruding itself  upon the notice of  men of the
myriad happier planets.

In the  latter days of the  Galactic Empire, a few  political prisoners had
inhabited  its wastes,  while  an observatory  and a  small  Naval garrison
served  to keep  it from  complete desertion.  Later, in  the evil  days of
strife, even before the  time of Hari Seldon, the weaker sort of men, tired
of the  periodic decades of insecurity and  danger; weary of sacked planets
and  a ghostly  succession of  ephemeral emperors  making their way  to the
Purple for  a few  wicked, fruitless years   these men  fled the populated
centers   and  sought  shelter   in  the   barren  nooks  of   the  Galaxy.

Along the  chilly wastes of Rossem,  villages huddled. Its sun  was a small
ruddy niggard that clutched  its dribble of heat to itself, while snow beat
thinly down for nine months of the year. The tough native grain lay dormant
in the soil those snow-filled months, then grew and ripened in almost panic
speed, when the sun's reluctant radiation brought the temperature to nearly
fifty.

Small, goatlike animals cropped the grasslands, kicking the thin snow aside
with tiny, tri-hooved feet.

The men  of Rossem  had, thus, their bread  and their milk   and when they
could spare  an animal  even  their meat. The darkly  ominous forests that
gnarled their way over half of the equatorial region of the planet supplied
a tough,  fine-grained wood  for housing. This wood,  together with certain
furs and  minerals, was even worth  exporting, and the ships  of the Empire
came at times and  brought in exchange farm machinery, atomic heaters, even
televisor sets.  The last was  not really incongruous, for  the long winter
imposed a lonely hibernation upon the peasant.

Imperial  history flowed  past the  peasants of  Rossem. The  trading ships
might  bring news  in  impatient spurts;  occasionally new  fugitives would
arrive   at  one  time, a  relatively large  group arrived  in a  body and
remained  and these usually had news of the Galaxy.

It was  then that the Rossemites learned  of sweeping battles and decimated
populations  or of  tyrannical emperors  and rebellious viceroys.  And they
would sigh  and shake their heads, and draw  their fur collars closer about
their bearded  faces as they sat  about the village square  in the weak sun
and philosophized on the evil of men.

Then after a while,  no trading ships arrived at all, and life grew harder.
Supplies  of foreign, soft  food, of  tobacco, of machinery  stopped. Vague
word from scraps gathered  on the televisor brought increasingly disturbing
news. And finally it spread that Trantor had been sacked. The great capital
world  of  all  the  Galaxy,  the  splendid,  storied,  unapproachable  and
incomparable home of the emperors had been despoiled and ruined and brought
to utter destruction.

It  was something  inconceivable, and  to many  of the peasants  of Rossem,
scratching away  at their  fields, it might  well seem that the  end of the
Galaxy was at hand.

And then one day not unlike other days a ship arrived again. The old men of
each village  nodded wisely  and lifted their  old eyelids to  whisper that
thus  it  had  been  in  their  father's  time    but  it  wasn't,  quite.

This ship  was not an  Imperial ship. The glowing  Spaceship-and-Sun of the
Empire was missing from  its prow. It was a stubby affair made of scraps of
older ships   and  the men within  called themselves soldiers  of Tazenda.

The peasants were confused. They had not heard of Tazenda, but they greeted
the soldiers  nevertheless in  the traditional fashion  of hospitality. The
newcomers inquired  closely as to the  nature of the planet,  the number of
its inhabitants, the number of its cities  a word mistaken by the peasants
to mean "villages" to  the confusion of all concerned  its type of economy
and so on.

Other  ships came  and proclamations  were issued  all over the  world that
Tazenda  was now the  ruling world,  that tax-collecting stations  would be
established girdling the equator   the inhabited region  that percentages
of  grain  and  furs  according  to  certain numerical  formulae  would  be
collected annually.

The Rossemites  had blinked  solemnly, uncertain of the  word "taxes." When
collection time came, many had paid, or had stood by in confusion while the
uniformed, other-wordlings  loaded the  harvested corn and the  pelts on to
the broad ground-cars.

Here and  there indignant peasants banded  together and brought out ancient
hunting  weapons   but  of this  nothing ever  came. Grumblingly  they had
disbanded when  the men of Tazenda came and  with dismay watched their hard
struggle for existence become harder.

But a  new equilibrium was reached. The  Tazendian governor lived dourly in
the village  of Gentri, from which  all Rossemites were barred.  He and the
officials under him were  dim otherworld beings that rarely impinged on the
Rossemite ken.  The tax-farmers, Rossemites in  the employ of Tazenda, came
periodically, but  they were creatures of custom now   and the peasant had
learned how  to hide  his grain and  drive his cattle into  the forest, and
refrain from having his hut appear too ostentatiously prosperous. Then with
a dull, uncomprehending expression  he would greet all sharp questioning as
to his assets by merely pointing at what they could see.

Even that  grew less, and taxes decreased, almost  as If Tazenda wearied of
extorting pennies from such a world.

Trading sprang  up and perhaps Tazenda found  that more profitable. The men
of  Rossem no  longer received  in exchange  the polished creations  of the
Empire, but even Tazendian  machines and Tazendian food was better than the
native  stuff. And  there were  clothes for  the women  of other  than gray
home-spun, which was a very important thing.

So  once again,  Galactic history  glided past  peacefully enough,  and the
peasants scrabbIed life out of the hard soil.

Narovi  blew   into  his   beard  as  he   stepped  out  of   his  cottage.

The first snows were sifting across the hard ground and the sky was a dull,
overcast pink. He squinted  carefully upward and decided that no real storm
was in sight. He could travel to Gentri without much trouble and get rid of
his surplus  grain in  return for enough  canned foods to  last the winter.

He roared  back through the door, which he opened  a crack for the purpose:
"Has the car been fed its fuel, yunker?"

A voice  shouted from within, and then Narovi's  oldest son, his short, red
beard  not  yet  completely outgrown  its  boyish  sparseness, joined  him.

"The car,"  he said, sullenly, "is  fueled and rides well,  but for the bad
condition of the axles. For that I am of no blame. I have told you it needs
expert repairs."

The old  man stepped back  and surveyed his son  through lowering eyebrows,
then thrust  his hairy chin outward:  "And is the fault  mine? Where and in
what  manner  may I  achieve  expert  repairs? Has  the  harvest then  been
anything but  scanty for five years?  Have my herds escaped  the pest? Have
the pelts climbed of themselves"

"Narovi!"  The well-known  voice from  within stopped  him in  mid-word. He
grumbled, "Well,  well  and now  your mother must insert  herself into the
affairs of a father  and his son. Bring out the car, and see to it that the
storage trailers are securely attached."

He  pounded  his  gloved  hands  together,  and looked  upward  again.  The
dimly-ruddy clouds were gathering and the gray sky that showed in the rifts
bore no warmth. The sun was hidden.

He was at the  point of looking away, when his dropping eyes caught and his
finger almost  automatically rose  on high while  his mouth fell  open in a
shout, in complete disregard of the cold air.

"Wife," he called vigorously, "Old woman  come here."

An  indignant head  appeared  at a  window. The  woman's eyes  followed his
finger, gaped. With a  cry, she dashed down the wooden stairs, snatching up
an old wrap  and a square of linen as she went.  She emerged with the linen
wrapped insecurely  over her head and ears, and  the wrap dangling from her
shoulders.

She snuffled: "It is a ship from outer space."

And  Narovi remarked  impatiently:  "And what  else  could it  be? We  have
visitors, old woman, visitors!"

The ship  was sinking slowly to  a landing on the  bare frozen field in the
northern portions of Narovi's farm.

"But  what shall  we  do?" gasped  the woman.  "Can  we offer  these people
hospitality? Is  the dirt floor of our hovel to  be theirs and the pickings
of last week's hoecake?"

"Shall  they then  go to  our neighbors?"  Narovi purpled past  the crimson
induced by the cold and his arms in their sleek fur covering lunged out and
seized the woman's brawny shoulders.

"Wife of  my soul," he purred, "you will take the  two chairs from our room
downstairs; you  will see that  a fat youngling is  slaughtered and roasted
with tubers; you will  bake a fresh hoecake. I go now to greet these men of
power from  outer space ... and  ... and" He paused,  placed his great cap
awry, and scratched hesitantly.  "Yes, I shall bring my jug of brewed grain
as well. Hearty drink is pleasant."

The woman's  mouth had flapped  idly during this speech.  Nothing came out.
And when  that stage passed, it was only  a discordant screech that issued.

Narovi lifted  a finger, "Old woman, what was it  the village Elders said a
se'nnight since? Eh? Stir  your memory. The Elders went from farm to farm 
themselves! Imagine the importance of it!  to ask us that should any ships
from outer  space land, they were to be informed  immediately on the orders
of the governor.

"And now  shall I not seize the opportunity to win  into the good graces of
those in  power? Regard that ship.  Have you ever seen  its like? These men
from  the outer  worlds are  rich, great.  The governor himself  sends such
urgent messages  concerning them that the Elders walk  from farm to farm in
the cooling weather. Perhaps the message is sent throughout all Rossem that
these men  are greatly desired  by the Lords of  Tazenda  and it  is on my
farm that they are landing."

He fairly hopped for  anxiety, "The proper hospitality now  the mention of
my name to the governor  and what may not be ours?"

His  wife  was  suddenly   aware  of  the  cold  biting  through  her  thin
house-clothing. She  leaped towards the door,  shouting over her shoulders,
"Leave then quickly."

But she was speaking  to a man who was even then racing towards the segment
of the horizon against which the ship sank.

Neither the cold of  the world, nor its bleak, empty spaces worried General
Han  Pritcher. Nor the  poverty of  their surroundings, nor  the perspiring
peasant himself.

What did bother him was the question of the wisdom of their tactics? He and
Channis were alone here.

The  ship,   left  in  space,  could  take   care  of  itself  in  ordinary
circumstances, but  still, he felt  unsafe. It was Channis,  of course, who
was responsible for this move. He looked across at the young man and caught
him  winking cheerfully  at the  gap in  the furred  partition, in  which a
woman's   peeping    eyes   and   gaping    mouth   momentarily   appeared.

Channis, at  least, seemed  completely at ease. That  fact Pritcher savored
with  a vinegary  satisfaction.  His game  had not  much longer  to proceed
exactly   as  he   wished   it.  Yet,   meanwhile  their   wrist  ultrawave
sender-receivers    were   their    only   connection   with    the   ship.

And then  the peasant  host smiled enormously  and bobbed his  head several
times and said in a voice oily with respect, "Noble Lords, I crave leave to
tell you  that my eldest son  a good, worthy  lad whom my poverty prevents
from educating  as his  wisdom deserves   has informed me  that the Elders
will arrive soon. I  trust your stay here has been as pleasant as my humble
means   for  I  am poverty-stricken,  though a  hard-working,  honest, and
humble   farmer,  as   anyone  here   will  tell   you     could  afford."

"Elders?"  said  Channis, lightly.  "The  chief  men of  the region  here?"

"So  they are, Noble  Lords, and honest,  worthy men  all of them,  for our
entire village  is known throughout Rossem  as a just and  righteous spot 
though living  is hard  and the returns  of the fields  and forests meager.
Perhaps  you will  mention to the  Elders, Noble  Lords, of my  respect and
honor for  travelers and it may  happen that they will  request a new motor
wagon  for our household  as the old  one can  scarcely creep and  upon the
remnant of it depends our livelihood."

He looked  humbly eager  and Han Pritcher  nodded with thee  properly aloof
condescension required  of the  role of "Noble, Lords"  bestowed upon them.

"A  report  of your  hospitality  shall  reach the  ears  of your  Elders."

Pritcher seized  the next moments  of isolation to speak  to the apparently
half-sleeping Channis.

"I am not particularly  fond of this meeting of the Elders," he said. "Have
you any thoughts on the subject?"

Channis seemed surprised. "No. What worries you?"

"It seems  we have  better things to  do than to  become conspicuous here.'

Channis spoke  hastily, in a low  monotoned voice: "It may  be necessary to
risk becoming conspicuous in  our next moves. We won't find the type of men
we  want, Pritcher,  by  simply reaching  out a  hand into  a dark  bag and
groping. Men who rule  by tricks of the mind need not necessarily be men in
obvious  power.  In  the  first  place,  the psychologists  of  the  Second
Foundation are probably a very small minority of the total population, just
as on  your own First  Foundation, the technicians and  scientists formed a
minority. The ordinary inhabitants  are probably just that  very ordinary.
The psychologists  may even be well  hidden, and the men  in the apparently
ruling position, may honestly think they are the true masters. Our solution
to  that problem  may  be found  here on  this  frozen lump  of  a planet."

"I don't follow that at all."

"Why, see  here, it's obvious enough.  Tazenda is probably a  huge world of
millions or  hundreds of millions. How  could we identify the psychologists
among them and be able to report truly to the Mule that we have located the
Second Foundation? But here, on this tiny peasant world and subject planet,
an the  Tazendian rulers,  our host informs  us, are concentrated  in their
chief village  of Gentri.  There may be  only a few hundred  of them there,
Pritcher,  and among  them must  be one or  more of  the men of  the Second
Foundation. We will go  there eventually, but let us see the Elders first 
it's a logical step on the way."

They drew  apart easily, as their black-bearded  host tumbled into the room
again, obviously agitated.

"Noble Lords,  the Elders are arriving. I crave leave  to beg you once more
to  mention a  word, perhaps,  on my  behalf" He  almost bent double  in a
paroxysm of fawning.

"We shall  certainly remember you," said  Channis. "Are these your Elders?"

They apparently were. There were three.

One  approached.  He bowed  with  a  dignified respect  and  said: "We  are
honored. Transportation has been  provided, Respected sirs, and we hope for
the pleasure of your company at our Meeting Hall."

                              THIRD INTERLUDE

The First  Speaker gazed wistfully  at the night sky.  Wispy clouds scudded
across the faint stargleams. Space looked actively hostile. It was cold and
awful at best but now it contained that strange creature, the Mule, and the
very  content  seemed  to  darken  and  thicken  it  into  ominous  threat.

The meeting  was over. It had not been long. There  had been the doubts and
questionings inspired by the difficult mathematical problem of dealing with
a mental  mutant of uncertain makeup. All  the extreme permutations had had
to be considered.

Were  they even  yet certain? Somewhere  in this  region of space   within
reaching distance  as Galactic spaces go  was the  Mule. What would he do?

It was  easy enough to handle  his men. They reacted   and were reacting 
according to plan.

But what of the Mule himself?

                                     4

                           Two Men and the Elders

The Elders  of this particular region  of Rossem were not  exactly what one
might have  expected. They were not a  mere extrapolation of the peasantry;
older, more authoritative, less friendly.

Not at all.

The dignity  that had marked them at first  meeting had grown in impression
till  it had reached  the mark  of being their  predominant characteristic.

They  sat  about  their  oval table  like  so  many  grave and  slow-moving
thinkers. Most were a  trifle past their physical prime, though the few who
possessed  beards  wore  them  short  and neatly  arranged.  Still,  enough
appeared younger  than forty to make  it quite obvious that  "Elders" was a
term  of  respect  rather  than  entirely  a literal  description  of  age.

The two  from outer space were  at the head of the  table and in the solemn
silence  that  accompanied a  rather  frugal meal  that seemed  ceremonious
rather   than  nourishing,   absorbed  the  new,   contrasting  atmosphere.

After  the meal and  after one or  two respectful  remarks  too  short and
simple  to be  called  speeches   had been  made  by those  of  the Elders
apparently  held most  in  esteem, an  informality forced  itself  upon the
assembly.

It was  as if the dignity of greeting  foreign personages had finally given
way  to  the  amiable  rustic  qualities  of  curiosity  and  friendliness.

They  crowded around  the two  strangers and  the flood of  questions came.

They asked  if it were difficult  to handle a spaceship,  how many men were
required for the job, if better motors could be made for their ground-cars,
if it was true  that it rarely snowed on other worlds as was said to be the
case with Tazenda, how many people lived on their world, if it was as large
as Tazenda, if it  was far away, how their clothes were woven and what gave
them the metallic shimmer, why they did not wear furs, if they shaved every
day, what  sort of stone that  was in Pritcher's ring   The list stretched
out.

And almost  always the questions  were addressed to Pritcher  as though, as
the  elder, they  automatically  invested him  with the  greater authority.
Pritcher found  himself forced to answer at  greater and greater length. It
was like an immersion in a crowd of children. Their questions were those of
utter  and  disarming  wonder.  Their  eagerness  to  know  was  completely
irresistible and would not be denied.

Pritcher explained  that spaceships  were not difficult to  handle and that
crews  varied with the  size, from one  to many,  that the motors  of their
ground-cars were unknown in  detail to him but could doubtless be improved,
that the climates of worlds varied almost infinitely, that many hundreds of
millions  lived  on  his  world  but  that  it  was far  smaller  and  more
insignificant  than the great  empire of  Tazenda, that their  clothes were
woven  of  silicone  plastics in  which  metallic  luster was  artificially
produced  by proper  orientation of  the surface  molecules, and  that they
could  be artificially  heated  so that  furs were  unnecessary,  that they
shaved  every day, that  the stone in  his ring  was an amethyst.  The list
stretched out. He found  himself thawing to these naive provincials against
his will.

And always  as he answered there  was a rapid chatter  among the Elders, as
though  they debated  the information  gained. It  was difficult  to follow
these inner  discussions of theirs for they  lapsed into their own accented
version of  the universal  Galactic language that,  through long separation
from the currents of living speech, had become archaic.

Almost, one might say,  their curt comments among themselves hovered on the
edge of understanding, but  just managed to elude the clutching tendrils of
comprehension.

Until finally  Channis interrupted to  say, "Good sirs, you  must answer us
for a while, for we are strangers and would be very much interested to know
all we can of Tazenda."

And  what happened  then  was that  a great  silence fell  and each  of the
hitherto voluble Elders grew  silent. Their hands, which had been moving in
such rapid and delicate accompaniment to their words as though to give them
greater scope and varied shades of meaning, fell suddenly limp. They stared
furtively at  one another, apparently  quite willing each to  let the other
have all the floor.

Pritcher interposed  quickly, "My companion asks  this in friendliness, for
the fame  of Tazenda fills the  Galaxy and we, of  course, shall inform the
governor   of   the  loyalty   and   love   of  the   Elders  of   Rossem."

No  sigh of  relief was heard  but faces  brightened. An Elder  stroked his
beard  with thumb  and  forefinger, straightening  its slight  curl  with a
gentle  pressure, and  said:  "We are  faithful  servants of  the Lords  of
Tazenda."

Pritcher's annoyance  at Channis' bald question  subsided. It was apparent,
at least, that  the age that he had felt creeping over  him of late had not
yet  deprived him  of his own  capacity for  making smooth the  blunders of
others.

He continued: "We do not know, in our far part of the universe, much of the
past  history  of  the  Lords  of  Tazenda.  We  presume  they  have  ruled
benevolently here for a long time."

The same Elder who  spoke before, answered. In a soft, automatic way he had
become spokesman. He said:  "Not the grandfather of the oldest can recall a
time in which the Lords were absent."

"It has been a time of peace?"

"It has been a  time of peace!" He hesitated. "The governor is a strong and
powerful Lord  who would  not hesitate to  punish traitors. None  of us are
traitors, of course."

"He  has  punished  some   in  the  past,  I  imagine,  as  they  deserve."

Again hesitation, "None here have ever been traitors, or our fathers or our
fathers'  fathers. But  on other  worlds, there  have been such,  and death
followed for them quickly. It is not good to think of for we are humble men
who  are  poor  farmers  and  not  concerned  with  matters  of  politics."

The anxiety in his  voice, the universal concern in the eyes of all of them
was obvious.

Pritcher said  smoothly: "Could you inform  us as to how  we can arrange an
audience with your governor."

And  instantly an  element  of sudden  bewilderment entered  the situation.

For  after a  long  moment, the  elder said:  "Why, did  you not  know? The
governor will  be here tomorrow. He  has expected you. It  has been a great
honor  for  us. We  ...  we  hope earnestly  that  you will  report to  him
satisfactorily as to our loyalty to him."

Pritcher's smile scarcely twitched. "Expected us?"

The Elder  looked wonderingly from one  to the other. "Why  ... it is now a
week since we have been waiting for you."

Their quarters were undoubtedly luxurious for the world. Pritcher had lived
in   worse.  Channis   showed  nothing   but  indifference   to  externals.

But there was an element of tension between them of a different nature than
hitherto. Pritcher,  felt the time approaching  for a definite decision and
yet  there was  still the  desirability of  additional waiting. To  see the
governor first would be  to increase the gamble to dangerous dimensions and
yet to win that  gamble might multi-double the winnings. He felt a surge of
anger  at  the  slight  crease  between  Channis'  eyebrows,  the  delicate
uncertainty with  which the  young man's lower  lip presented itself  to an
upper tooth. He detested  the useless play-acting and yearned for an end to
it.

He said: "We seem to be anticipated."

'Yes," said Channis, simply.

"Just that? You have  no contribution of greater pith to make. We come here
and find  that the governor expects  us. Presumably we shall  find from the
governor that  Tazenda itself expects us. Of what  value then is our entire
mission?"

Channis looked  up, without  endeavoring to conceal  the weary note  in his
voice: "To expect us is one thing; to know who we are and what we came for,
is another."

"Do you expect to  conceal these things from men of the Second Foundation?"

"Perhaps. Why  not? Are you ready  to throw your hand  in? Suppose our ship
was  detected in  space. Is  it unusual  for a  realm to  maintain frontier
observation  posts? Even  if  we were  ordinary strangers,  we would  be of
interest."

"Sufficient interest for a governor to come to us rather than the reverse?'

Channis shrugged:  "Well have to meet that problem  later. Let us see what
this governor is like."

Pritcher bared  his teeth in a  bloodless kind of scowl.  The situation was
becoming ridiculous.

Channis  proceeded with  an  artificial animation:  "At least  we  know one
thing. Tazenda is the Second Foundation or a million shreds of evidence are
unanimously pointing the wrong way. How do you interpret the obvious terror
in  which  these  natives  hold  Tazenda?  I  see  no  signs  of  political
domination.  Their  groups of  Elders  apparently meet  freely and  without
interference of  any sort. The taxation  they speak of doesn't  seem at all
extensive to  me or efficiently carried through.  The natives speak much of
poverty  but seem  sturdy and  well-fed. The  houses are uncouth  and their
villages   rude,   but   are    obviously   adequate   for   the   purpose.

"In fact, the world fascinates me. I have never seen a more forbidding one,
yet  I am  convinced there is  no suffering  among the population  and that
their  uncomplicated  lives manage  to  contain  a well-balanced  happiness
lacking  in  the  sophisticated   populations  of  the  advanced  centers."

"Are you an admirer of peasant virtues, then?"

"The stars forbid." Channis  seemed amused at the idea. "I merely point out
the  significance  of  all   this.  Apparently,  Tazenda  is  an  efficient
administrator   efficient in a sense far  different from the efficiency of
the old  Empire or of the  First Foundation, or even  of our own Union. All
these have  brought mechanical efficiency to their  subjects at the cost of
more intangible values. Tazenda brings happiness and sufficiency. Don't you
see that the whole  orientation of their domination is different? It is not
physical, but psychological."

"Really?" Pritcher,  allowed himself irony. "And  the terror with which the
Elders  spoke   of  the  punishment  of   treason  by  these  kind  hearted
psychologist   administrators?   How   does   that   suit   your   thesis?"

"Were they the objects  of the punishment? They speak of punishment only of
others. It  is as if knowledge of punishment has  been so well implanted in
them that punishment itself need never be used. The proper mental attitudes
are so  inserted into  their minds that  I am certain that  not a Tazendian
soldier exists on the planet. Don't you see all this?"

"Ill see  perhaps," said Pritcher,  coldly, "when I see  the governor. And
what, by the way, if our mentalities are handled?"

Channis replied  with brutal contempt: "You should be  accustomed to that."

Pritcher whitened perceptibly, and, with an effort, turned away. They spoke
to one another no more that day.

It was  in the silent windlessness  of the frigid night,  as he listened to
the soft,  sleeping motions  of the other, that  Pritcher silently adjusted
his  wrist-transmitter  to  the ultrawave  region  for  which Channis'  was
unadjustable and,  with noiseless touches of  his fingernail, contacted the
ship.

The answer came in little periods of noiseless vibration that barely lifted
themselves above the sensory threshold.

Twice Pritcher asked: "Any communications at all yet?"

Twice the answer came: "None. We wait always."

He got out of  bed. It was cold in the room and he pulled the furry blanket
around him as  he sat in the chair and stared out  at the crowding stars so
different in  the brightness  and complexity of their  arrangement from the
even fog  of the Galactic Lens  that dominated the night  sky of his native
Periphery.

Somewhere there between the  stars was the answer to the complications that
overwhelmed him,  and he felt the yearning for  that solution to arrive and
end things.

For a  moment he wondered again if the Mule were  right  if Conversion had
robbed him  of the firm sharp  edge of self-reliance. Or  was it simply age
and the fluctuations of these last years?

He didn't really care.

He was tired.

The governor  of Rossem arrived with  minor ostentation. His only companion
was the uniformed man at the controls of the ground-car.

The  ground-car itself  was  of lush  design  but to  Pritcher it  appeared
inefficient.  It turned clumsily;  more than  once it apparently  balked at
what might  have been a too-rapid  change of gears. It  was obvious at once
from  its  design  that  it ran  on  chemical,  and  not  on atomic,  fuel.

The  Tazendian governor  stepped softly on  to the  thin layer of  snow and
advanced between  two lines of respectful  Elders. He did not  look at them
but entered quickly. They followed after him.

From  the  quarters assigned  to  them, the  two  men of  the Mule's  Union
watched.  He    the   governor    was  thickset,  rather  stocky,  short,
unimpressive.

But what of that?

Pritcher  cursed himself  for a  failure of  nerve. His  face, to  be sure,
remained icily calm. There  was no humiliation before Channis  but he knew
very well that his  blood pressure had heightened and his throat had become
dry.

It was  not a case of  physical fear. He was  not one of those dull-witted,
unimaginative men of nerveless meat who were too stupid ever to be afraid 
but physical fear he could account for and discount.

But this was different. It was the other fear.

He glanced  quickly at Channis. The young man glanced  idly at the nails of
one   hand    and   poked   leisurely   at    some   trifling   unevenness.

Something inside Pritcher became vastly indignant. What had Channis to fear
of mental handling?

Pritcher caught  a mental breath and  tried to think back.  How had he been
before the  Mule had Converted him from the  die-hard Democrat that he was.
It was hard to  remember. He could not place himself mentally. He could not
break  the  clinging  wires   that  bound  him  emotionally  to  the  Mule.
Intellectually, he could remember that he had once tried to assassinate the
Mule but  not for all the straining he could  endure, could he remember his
emotions  at the  time. That  might be  the self-defense  of his  own mind,
however, for  at the  intuitive thought of  what those emotions  might have
been  not realizing  the details, but merely comprehending the drift of it
 his stomach grew queasy.

What if the governor tampered with his mind?

What  if  the  insubstantial  mental  tendrils  of  a  Second  Foundationer
insinuated itself down the emotional crevices of his makeup and pulled them
apart and rejoined them?

There  had been no  sensation the first  time. There  had been no  pain, no
mental jar   not even a feeling of discontinuity.  He had always loved the
Mule. If  there had ever been  a time long before   as long before as five
short years   when he had  thought he hadn't loved  him, that he had hated
him    that was  just  a horrid  illusion.  The thought  of that  illusion
embarrassed him.

But there had been no pain.

Would meeting the governor duplicate that? Would all that had gone before 
all his service for  the Mule  all his life's orientation  join the hazy,
other-life dream that held  the word, Democracy. The Mule also a dream, and
only to Tazenda, his loyalty

Sharply, he turned away.

There was that strong desire to retch.

And then Channis' voice  clashed on his ear, "I think this is it, general."

Pritcher turned again. An Elder had opened the door silently and stood with
a dignified and calm respect upon the threshold.

He said,  "His Excellency, Governor of Rossem, in the  name of the Lords of
Tazenda, is  pleased to present his permission  for an audience and request
your appearance before him."

"Sure thing,"  and Channis  tightened his belt  with a jerk  and adjusted a
Rossemian hood over his head.

Pritcher's  jaw   set.   This  was  the   beginning  of  the  real  gamble.

The governor of Rossem  was not of formidable appearance. For one thing, he
was bareheaded,  and his thinning hair, light  brown, tending to gray, lent
him mildness.  His bony eye-ridges lowered at them, and  his eyes, set in a
fine  network   of  surrounding  wrinkles,  seemed   calculating,  but  his
fresh-cropped chin  was soft and small and,  by the universal convention of
followers  of  the  pseudoscience  of  reading  character  by  facial  bony
structure, seemed "weak."

Pritcher, avoided  the eyes  and watched the  chin. He didn't  know whether
that would be effective  if anything would be.

The governor's voice was high-pitched, indifferent: "Welcome to Tazenda. We
greet you in peace. You have eaten?"

His  hand   long  fingers, gnarled  veins   waved  almost regally  at the
U-shaped table.

They bowed and sat  down. The governor sat at the outer side of the base of
the U,  they on  the inner; along  both arms sat  the double  row of silent
Elders.

The  governor spoke  in  short, abrupt  sentences   praising  the food  as
Tazendian importations  and it had indeed a quality different if, somehow,
not  so much  better, than  the rougher  food of  the Elders   disparaging
Rossemian  weather,  referring  with   an  attempt  at  casualness  to  the
intricacies of space travel.

Channis talked little. Pritcher not at all.

Then it was over.  The small, stewed fruits were finished; the napkins used
and discarded, and the governor leaned back.

His small eyes sparkled.

"I have  inquired as to your  ship. Naturally, I would  like to see that it
receives due  care and  overhaul. I am  told its whereabouts  are unknown."

"True." Channis  replied lightly. "We have left it in  space. It is a large
ship, suitable for long  journeys in sometimes hostile regions, and we felt
that  landing  it  here  might give  rise  to  doubts  as  to our  peaceful
intentions. We preferred to land alone, unarmed."

"A  friendly act,"  commented  the governor,  without conviction.  "A large
ship, you say?"

"Not a vessel of war, excellency."

"Ha, hum. Where is it you come from?"

"A small  world of the Santanni sector, your excellency.  It may be you are
not aware  of its existence for  it lacks importance. We  are interested in
establishing trade relationships."

"Trade, eh? And what have you to sell?'

"Machines  of   all  sorts,   excellency.  In  return,   food,  wood,  ores

"Ha,  hum." The  governor seemed  doubtful. "I  know little  these matters.
Perhaps mutual profit may  be arranged. Perhaps, after I have examined your
credentials  at  length   for  much  information will  be  required by  my
government before  matters may proceed,  you understand  and  after I have
looked  over  your ship,  it  would  be advisable  for  you  to proceed  to
Tazenda."

There was no answer  to that, and the governor's attitude iced perceptibly.

"It is necessary that I see your ship, however."

Channis said distantly: "The  ship, unfortunately, is undergoing repairs at
the  moment. If  your  excellency would  not object  giving  us forty-eight
hours, it will be at your service."

"I am not accustomed to waiting."

For the  first time, Pritcher met  the glare of the  other, eye to eye, and
his breath  exploded softly inside him. For a  moment, he had the sensation
of drowning, but then his eyes tore away.

Channis did not waver.  He said: "The ship cannot be landed for forty-eight
hours,  excellency. We  are  here and  unarmed.  Can you  doubt our  honest
intentions?"

There was  a long silence, and then the governor  said gruffly, "Tell me of
the world from which you come."

That was  all. It passed with  that. There was no  more unpleasantness. The
governor, having fulfilled his  official duty, apparently lost interest and
the audience died a dull death.

And when it was all over, Pritcher found himself back in their quarters and
took stock of himself.

Carefully   holding  his  breath   he "felt"  his emotions.  Certainly he
seemed no  different to himself, but  would he feel  any difference? Had he
felt  different  after the  Mule's  Conversion? Had  not everything  seemed
natural? As it should have been?

He experimented.

With cold  purpose, he shouted inside  the silent caverns of  his mind, and
the shout  was, "The  Second Foundation must be  discovered and destroyed."

And the emotion that  accompanied it was honest hate. There was not as much
as a hesitation involved in it.

And then  it was in his  mind to substitute the  word "Mule" for the phrase
"Second  Foundation" and  his  breath caught  at the  mere emotion  and his
tongue clogged.

So far, good.

But  had he  been handled otherwise   more  subtly? Had tiny  changes been
made? Changes  that he couldn't detect  because their very existence warped
his judgment.

There was no way to tell.

But he  still felt  absolute loyalty to  the Mule! If  that were unchanged,
nothing else really mattered.

He turned  his mind  to action again.  Channis was busy  at his  end of the
room.   Pritcher's    thumbnail   idled   at    his   wrist   communicator.

And then at the  response that came he felt a wave of relief surge over him
and leave him weak.

The  quiet muscles  of  his face  did not  betray  him, but  inside  he was
shouting with  joy  and when Channis turned to face  him, he knew that the
farce was about over.

                              FOURTH INTERLUDE

The two  Speakers passed each other on the road  and one stopped the other.

"I have word from the First Speaker."

There was  a half-apprehensive  flicker in the  other's eyes. "Intersection
point?"

"Yes! May we live to see the dawn!"

                                     5

                            One Man and the Mule

There  was no  sign in  any of Channis'  actions that  he was aware  of any
subtle change  in the attitude of Pritcher, and  in their relations to each
other. He  leaned back on the hard wooden  bench and spread-eagled his feet
out in front of him.

"What did you make of the governor?"

Pritcher shrugged: "Nothing at all. He certainly seemed no mental genius to
me. A  very poor specimen of  the Second Foundation, if  that's what he was
supposed to be."

"I don't think  he was, you know. I'm not sure what  to make of it. Suppose
you were  a Second Foundationer," Channis grew  thoughtful, "what would you
do? Suppose you had  an idea of our purpose here. How would you handle us?"

"Conversion, of course."

"Like the  Mule?" Channis  looked up, sharply. "Would  we know if they  had
converted us?  I wonder  And what if  they were simply  psychologists, but
very clever ones."

"In that case, I'd have us killed rather quickly."

"And our  ship? No." Channis  wagged a forefinger. "We're  playing a bluff,
Pritcher,  old man. It  can only be  a bluff.  Even if they  have emotional
control down pat, we  you and I  are only fronts. It's the Mule they must
fight,  and they're  being just  as careful of  us as  we are of  them. I'm
assuming that they know who we are."

Pritcher, stared coldly: "What do you intend doing?"

"Wait." The  word was  bitten off. "Let  them come to  us. They're worried,
maybe about  the ship, but probably  about the Mule. They  bluffed with the
governor. It didn't work.  We stayed pat. The next person they'll send will
be  a  Second  Foundationer,  and  hell  propose  a deal  of  some  sort."

"And then?"

"And then we make the deal."

"I don't think so."

"Because   you   think  it   will   double-cross  the   Mule?  It   won't."

"No, the Mule could handle your double-crosses, any you could invent. But I
still don't think so."

"Because  you  think  then  we couldn't  double-cross  the  Foundationers?"

"Perhaps not. But thats not the reason."

Channis let  his glance drop to  what the other held  in his fist, and said
grimly: "You mean that's the reason."

Pritcher  cradled  his  blaster,  "That's  right. You  are  under  arrest."

"Why?"

"For treason to the First Citizen of the Union."

Channis'   lips   hardened   upon   one   another:   "What's   going   on?"

"Treason!  As  I  said.   And  correction  of  the  matter,  on  my  part."

"Your   proof?  Or   evidence,  assumptions,   daydreams?  Are   you  mad?"

"No.  Are you?  Do  you think  the Mule  sends  out unweaned  youngsters on
ridiculous swashbuckling  missions for nothing?  It was queer to  me at the
time. But I wasted time in doubting myself. Why should he send you? Because
you smile and dress well? Because you're twenty-eight."

"Perhaps because I can  be trusted. Or aren't you in the market for logical
reasons?"

"Or perhaps  because you can't be  trusted. Which is logical  enough, as it
turns out."

"Are we matching  paradoxes, or is this all a word game  to see who can say
the least in the most words?"

And the blaster advanced, with Pritcher after it. He stood erect before the
younger man: "Stand up!"

Channis did so, in  no particular hurry, and felt the muzzle of the blaster
touch his belt with no shrinking of the stomach muscles.

Pritcher said: "What the  Mule wanted was to find the Second Foundation. He
had failed and I  had failed, and the secret that neither of us can find is
a well-hidden one. So there was one outstanding possibility left  and that
was to find a seeker who ready knew the hiding-place."

"Is that I?"

"Apparently it was. I  didn't know then, of course, but though my mind must
be slowing,  it still  points in the  right direction. How  easily we found
Star's End!  How miraculously you examined the  correct Field Region of the
Lens from among an infinite number of possibilties! And having done so, how
nicely we observe just  the correct point for observation! You clumsy fool!
Did  you so underestimate  me that  no combination of  impossible fortuties
struck you as being too much for me to swallow?"

"You mean I've been too successful?"

"Too successful by half for any loyal man."

"Because   the   standards  of   success   you   set  me   were  so   low?"

And the blaster prodded,  though in the face that confront Channis only the
cold glitter  of the eyes betrayed  the growing anger: "Because  you are in
the pay of the Second Foundation."

"Pay?" infinite contempt. "Prove that."

"Or under the mental influence."

"Without the Mule's knowledge? Ridiculous."

"With  the Mule's  knowledge. Exactly my  point, my you  dullard.  With the
Mule's knowledge.  Do you  suppose else that  you would be given  a ship to
play with? You led us to the Second Foundation as you were supposed to do."

"I thresh  a kernel of something  or other out of  this immensity of chaff.
May I  ask why I'm  supposed to be doing  all this? If were  a traitor, why
should I lead you  to the Second Foundation? Why not hither and yon through
the  Galaxy,   skipping  gaily,  finding  no   more  than  you  ever  did?'

"For the  sake of  the ship. And  because the men of  the Second Foundation
quite obviously need atomic warfare for self-defense."

'You'll have to do better than that. One ship won't mean thing to them, and
if they  think they'll  learn science from  it a build  atomic power plants
next year, they are  very, very simple Second Foundationers, indeed. On the
order of simplicity as yourself, I should say."

"You   will  have   the  opportunity   to  explain   that  to   the  Mule."

"We're going back to Kalgan?"

"On the contrary. We're  staying here. And the Mule will join us in fifteen
minutes    more  or   less.  Do  you  think  he  hasn't  followed  us,  my
sharp-witted, nimble-minded  lump of  self-admiration? You have  played the
decoy well in reverse. You may not have led our victims to us, but you have
certainly led us to our victims."

"May I  sit down," said Channis,  "and explain something to  you in picture
drawings? Please."

"You will remain standing."

At that,  I can  say it as  well standing. You  think the  Mule followed us
because    of   the    hypertracer    on   the    communication   circuit?"

The blaster might have wavered. Channis wouldn't have sworn to it. He said:
"You don't  look surprised. But I  don't waste time doubting  that you feel
surprised. Yes,  I knew about it. And now, having shown  you that I knew of
something you  didn't think I did, I'll tell you  something you don't know,
that I know you don't."

"You allow  yourself too  many preliminaries, Channis. I  should think your
sense of invention was more smoothly greased.

"There's  on invention to  this. There  have  been traitors, of  course, or
enemy  agents, if  you prefer  that term. But  the Mule  knew of that  in a
rather curious  way. It seems, you see, that some  of his Converted men had
been tampered with."

The blaster did waver that time. Unmistakably.

"I emphasize that, Pritcher.  It was why he needed me. I was an Unconverted
man. Didn't  he emphasize to you that he  needed an Unconverted? Whether he
gave you the real reason or not?"

"Try something  else, Channis.  If I were  against the Mule,  I'd know it."
Quietly, rapidly, Pritcher was  feeling his mind. It felt the same. It felt
the same. Obviously the man was lying.

"You  mean you  feel loyal  to the  Mule. Perhaps. Loyalty  wasn't tampered
with. Too  easily detectable, the Mule said. But  how do you feel mentally?
Sluggish? Since you started this trip, have you always felt normal? Or have
you felt strange sometimes,  as though you weren't quite yourself? What are
you trying  to do,  bore a hole  through me without  touching the trigger?"

Pritcher withdrew  his blaster half an inch, "What  are you trying to say?"

"I say that you've  been tampered with. You've been handled. You didn't see
the Mule  install that hypertracer. You  didn't see anyone do  it. You just
found it  there, and  assumed it was  the Mule, and ever  since you've been
assuming  he was  following  us. Sure,  the wrist  receiver  you're wearing
contacts the  ship on  a wave length  mine isn't good  for. Do  you think I
didn't  know that?"  He  was speaking  quickly now,  angrily. His  cloak of
indifference  had dissolved into  savagery. "But  it's not the  Mule that's
coming toward us from out there. It's not the Mule."

"Who, if not?"

"Well, who do you suppose? I found that hypertracer, the day we left. But I
didn't think  it was  the Mule.  He had  no reason for  indirection at that
point. Don't  you see the nonsense  of it? If I were  a traitor and he knew
that, I  could be  Converted as easily as  you were, and he  would have the
secret  of the  location of the  Second Foundation  out of my  mind without
sending me half across the Galaxy. Can you keep a secret from the Mule? And
if I didn't  know, then I couldn't lead him to it. So why send me in either
case?

"Obviously, that  hypertracer must have been  put there by an  agent of the
Second Foundation.  That's who's coming towards us  now. And would you have
been fooled  if your precious mind hadn't been  tampered with? What kind of
normality have you that  you imagine immense folly to be wisdom? Me bring a
ship  to   the  Second  Foundation?  What  would   they  do  with  a  ship?

"It's  you they want, Pritcher.  You know more about  the Union than anyone
but the Mule, and you're not dangerous to them while he is. Thats why they
put  the direction  of search into  my mind.  Of course, it  was completely
impossible for me to  find Tazenda by random searchings of the Lens. I knew
that. But I knew  there was the Second Foundation after us, and I knew they
engineered it.  Why not  play their game?  It was a battle  of bluffs. They
wanted  us and  I  wanted their  location   and  space take  the  one that
couldn't outbluff the other.

"But it's we that  will lose as long as you hold that blaster on me. And it
obviously isn't  your idea. It's  theirs. Give me the  blaster, Pritcher. I
know  it seems  wrong to  you, but  it isn't  your mind speaking,  it's the
Second Foundation within you. Give me the blaster, Pritcher, and well face
what's coming now, together."

Pritcher, faced a growing confusion in horror. Plausibility! Could he be so
wrong? Why  this eternal  doubt of himself?  Why wasn't he  sure? What made
Channis sound so plausible?

Plausibility!

Or  was  it his  own  tortured mind  fighting  the invasion  of the  alien.

Was he split in two?

Hazily,  he  saw  Channis  standing before  him,  hand  outstretched   and
suddenly, he knew he was going to give him the blaster.

And  as the  muscles of  his arm were  on the  point of contracting  in the
proper manner  to do so, the door opened, not hastily,  behind him  and he
turned.

There are  perhaps men  in the Galaxy  who can be confused  for one another
even  by  men at  their  peaceful  leisure. Correspondingly,  there may  be
conditions of mind when  even unlikely pairs may be mis-recognized. But the
Mule rises above any combination of the two factors.

Not all  Pritcher's agony of mind  prevented the instantaneous mental flood
of cool vigor that engulfed him.

Physically, the Mule could  not dominate any situation. Nor did he dominate
this one.

He was rather a  ridiculous figure in his layers of clothing that thickened
him past his normality without allowing him to reach normal dimensions even
so. His  face was  muffled and the  usually dominant beak  covered what was
left in a cold-red prominence.

Probably  as  a  vision  of rescue,  no  greater  incongruity could  exist.

He said: "Keep your blaster, Pritcher."

Then  he turned  to  Channis, who  had  shrugged and  seated himself:  "The
emotional context here seems rather confusing and considerably in conflict.
What's   this   about   someone   other   than   myself   following   you?"

Pritcher  intervened sharply: "Was  a hypertracer  placed upon our  ship by
your orders, sir?"

The Mule turned cool  eyes upon him, "Certainly. Is it very likely that any
organization in the Galaxy other than the Union of Worlds would have access
to it?'

"He said"

"Well, he's  here, general.  Indirect quotation is not  necessary. Have you
been saying anything, Channis?"

"Yes. But mistakes apparently,  sir. It has been my opinion that the tracer
was put  there by someone in  the pay of the  Second Foundation and that we
had  been led  here for  some purpose  of theirs,  which I was  prepared to
counter. I  was under the further  impression that the general  was more or
less in their hands."

"You sound as if you think so no longer."

"I'm  afraid   not.  Or  it  would   not  have  been  you   at  the  door."

"Well, then, let us  thresh this out." The Mule peeled off the outer layers
of padded, and electrically  heated clothing. "Do you mind if I sit down as
well? Now  we are safe here and perfectly free of any danger of intrusion.
No native of this  lump of ice will have any desire to approach this place.
I  assure  you  of  that," and  there  was  a  grim  earnestness about  his
insistence upon his powers.

Channis showed his disgust. "Why privacy? Is someone going to serve tea and
bring out the dancing girls?"

"Scarcely. What was this  theory of yours, young man? A Second Foundationer
was tracing you with a device which no one but I have and  how did you say
you found this place?"

"Apparently, sir,  it seems obvious,  in order to account  for known facts,
that certain notions have been put into my head"

"By these same Second Foundationers?"

"No one else, I imagine."

"Then it did not occur to you that if a Second Foundationer could force, or
entice, or inveigle you into going to the Second Foundation for purposes of
his  own   and  I assume  you imagined  he used  methods similar  to mine,
though, mind you, I can implant only emotions, not ideas  it did not occur
to  you that  if  he could  do that  there  was little  necessity to  put a
hypertracer on you.

And  Channis looked  up  sharply and  met his  sovereign's large  eyes with
sudden startle. Pritcher grunted  and a visible relaxation showed itself in
his shoulders.

"No," said Channis, "that hadn't occurred to me."

"Or that  if they were obliged to trace you,  they couldn't feel capable of
directing you, and that,  undirected, you could have precious little chance
of  finding   your  way  here  as  you  did.  Did    that  occur  to  you?"

"That, neither."

"Why not? Has your intellectual level receded to a
so-much-greater-than-probable degree?"

"The only  answer is a question,  sir. Are you joining  General Pritcher in
accusing me of being a traitor?"

"You have a defense in case I am?"

"Only the one I  presented to the general. If I were a traitor and knew the
whereabouts of  the Second Foundation,  you could Convert me  and learn the
knowledge directly. If you felt it necessary to trace me, then I hadn't the
knowledge beforehand  and wasn't a  traitor. So I answer  your paradox with
another."

"Then your conclusion?"

"That I am not a traitor."

"To   which   I  must   agree,   since  your   argument  is   irrefutable."

"Then may I ask you why you had us secretly followed?"

"Because  to all  the  facts there  is a  third  explanation. Both  you and
Pritcher explained some facts in your own individual ways, but not all. I 
if you  can spare  me the time   will explain  all. And in  a rather short
time, so there is little danger of boredom. Sit down, Pritcher, and give me
your blaster.  There is no danger of attack on us  any longer. None from in
here and none from out there. None in fact even from the Second Foundation.
Thanks to you, Channis."

The  room was  lit in  the usual  Rossemian fashion of  electrically heated
wire. A  single bulb was suspended  from the ceiling and  in its dim yellow
glow, the three cast their individual shadows.

The Mule said: "Since  I felt it necessary to trace Channis, it was obvious
I expect to gain  something thereby. Since he went to the Second Foundation
with a  startling speed and directness, we  can reasonably assume that that
was what I was expecting to happen. Since I did not gain the knowledge from
him directly, something must  have been preventing me. Those are the facts.
Channis, of  course, knows the answer.  So do I. Do  you see it, Pritcher?"

And Pritcher said doggedly: "No, sir."

"Then Ill explain. Only  one kind of man can both know the location of the
Second  Foundation and  prevent me  from learning  it. Channis,  I'm afraid
you're a Second Foundationer yourself."

And Channis'  elbows rested on his knees as  he leaned forward, and through
stiff and  angry lips  said: "What is  your direct evidence?  Deduction has
proven wrong twice today."

"There is  direct evidence,  too, Channis. It  was easy enough.  I told you
that my men had been tampered with. The tamperer must have been, obviously,
someone  who was  a)  Unconverted, and  b) fairly  close  to the  center of
things.  The field  was  large but  not  entirely unlimited.  You were  too
successful, Channis.  People liked you too much. You  got along too well. I
wondered

"And then I summoned you to take over this expedition and it didn't set you
back. I  watched your  emotions. It didn't  bother you. You  overplayed the
confidence there,  Channis. No man of real  competence could have avoided a
dash of  uncertainty at a job  like that. Since your  mind did avoid it, it
was either a foolish one or a controlled one.

It was  easy to  test the alternatives. I  seized your mind at  a moment of
relaxation and filled it with grief for an instant and then removed it. You
were angry afterwards with such accomplished art that I could have sworn it
was a natural reaction,  but for that which went first. For when I wrenched
at your  emotions, for  just one instant,  for one tiny  instant before you
could  catch yourself,  your mind resisted.  It was  all I needed  to know.

"No one could have resisted me, even for that tiny instant, without control
similar to mine."

Channis'   voice   was   low   and   bitter:  "Well,   then?   Now   what?"

"And now you die   as a Second Foundationer. Quite necessary, as I believe
you realize."

And once again Channis stared into the muzzle of a blaster. A muzzle guided
this time  by a  mind, not like  Pritcher's capable of  offhand twisting to
suit himself, but by  one as mature as his own and as resistant to force as
his own.

And the  period of time allotted him for a  correction of events was small.

What followed  thereafter is difficult  to describe by one  with the normal
complement  of  senses and  the  normal incapacity  for emotional  control.

Essentially,  this is  what  Channis realized  in  the tiny  space of  time
involved  in the  pushing  of the  Mule's thumb  upon the  trigger contact.

The  Mule's  current  emotional  makeup was  one  of  a  hard and  polished
determination,  unmisted  by  hesitation in  the  least.  Had Channis  been
sufficiently interested  afterward to calculate the  time involved from the
determination to  shoot to  the arrival of the  disintegrating energies, he
might  have realized  that  his leeway  was  about one-fifth  of a  second.

That was barely time.

What  the Mule  realized  in that  same tiny  space  of time  was  that the
emotional potential  of Channis' brain had  surged suddenly upwards without
his own mind feeling  any impact and that, simultaneously, a flood of pure,
thrilling  hatred   cascaded  upon   him  from  an   unexpected  direction.

It was  that new emotional element  that jerked his thumb  off the contact.
Nothing else  could have  done it, and  almost together with  his change of
action, came complete realization of the new situation.

It was a tableau that endured far less than the significance adhering to it
should require  from a dramatic  standpoint. There was the  Mule, thumb off
the  blaster, staring  intently upon  Channis There  was Channis  taut, not
quite  daring to  breathe  yet. And  there was  Pritcher, convulsed  in his
chair; every muscle at a spasmodic breaking point; every tendon writhing in
an  effort  to hurl  forward;  his face  twisted  at last  out of  schooled
woodenness into  an unrecognizable death mask of  horrid hate; and his eyes
only and entirely and supremely upon the Mule.

Only a word or two passed between Channis and the Mule  only a word or two
and that  utterly revealing stream of  emotional consciousness that remains
forever the  true interplay of understanding between  such as they. For the
sake of  our own limits, it is necessary to  translate into words what went
on, then, and thenceforward.

Channis said, tensely: "Youre  between two fires, First Citizen. You can't
control two  minds simultaneously,  not when one  of them is mine   so you
have your  choice. Pritcher, is  free of your Conversion  now. I've snapped
the bonds.  He's the old Pritcher; the one who tried  to kill you once; the
one who thinks you're the enemy of all that is free and right and holy; and
he's  the  one  besides  who knows  that  you've  debased  him to  helpless
adulation for five years. I'm holding him back now by suppressing his will,
but if you kill me, that ends, and in considerably less time than you could
shift   your  blaster   or   even  your   will     he   will  kill   you."

The Mule quite plainly realized that. He did not move.

Channis continued: "If you turn to place him under control, to kill him, to
do  anything, you won't  ever be quick  enough to  turn again to  stop me."

The  Mule   still  did  not   move.  Only  a  soft   sigh  of  realization.

"So," said  Channis, "throw down the  blaster, and let us  be on even terms
again, and you can have Pritcher back."

"I made  a mistake," said the Mule, finally. "It was  wrong to have a third
party present  when I confronted you. It  introduced one variable too many.
It is a mistake that must be paid for, I suppose."

He dropped  the blaster carelessly, and  kicked it to the  other end of the
room.    Simultaneously,   Pritcher    crumpled   into    profound   sleep.

"Hell  be   normal  when   he  awakes,"  said   the  Mule,  indifferently.

The entire  exchange from the time the Mule's  thumb had begun pressing the
trigger-contact to the time  he dropped the blaster had occupied just under
a second and a half of time.

But just  beneath the borders of  consciousness, for a time  just above the
borders  of detection,  Channis caught  a fugitive  emotional gleam  in the
Mule's  mind.  And  it  was  still  one  of  sure  and  confident  triumph.

                                     6

                      One Man, the Mule  and Another

Two men, apparently relaxed  and entirely at ease, poles apart physically 
with  every  nerve that  served  as emotional  detector quivering  tensely.

The Mule, for the  first time in long years, had insufficient surety of his
own way. Channis knew that, though he could protect himself for the moment,
it  was an  effort  and  that the attack  upon him  was none such  for his
opponent.   In  a  test   of  endurance,   Channis  knew  he   would  lose.

But it was  deadly to think of that. To give away  to the Mule an emotional
weakness would  be to hand him a weapon. There  was already that glimpse of
something  a winner's something  in the Mule's mind.

To gain time

Why did  the others  delay? Was that  the source of  the Mule's confidence?
What  did  his opponent  know  that he  didn't?  The mind  he watched  told
nothing. If only he could read ideas. And yet

Channis braked  his own  mental whirling roughly.  There was only  that; to
gain time

Channis  said: "Since  it is decided,  and not  denied by myself  after our
little duel  over Pritcher,  that I am  a Second Foundationer,  suppose you
tell me why I came to Tazenda."

"Oh, no,"  and the  Mule laughed, with  high-pitched confidence, "I  am not
Pritcher. I need make no explanations to you. You had what you thought were
reasons. Whatever  they were, your actions  suited me, and so  I inquire no
further."

"Yet there  must be such gaps  in your conception of  the story. Is Tazenda
the Second  Foundation you  expected to find?  Pritcher spoke much  of your
other attempt at finding  it, and of your psychologist tool, Ebling Mis. He
babbled a  bit sometimes  under my ...  uh ... slight  encouragement. Think
back on Ebling Mis, First Citizen."

"Why should I?" Confidence!

Channis felt that confidence edge out into the open, as if with the passage
of time,  any anxiety the Mule might  be having was increasingly vanishing.

He said,  firmly restraining the rush  of desperation: "You lack curiosity,
then? Pritcher  told me of Mis'  vast surprise at  something. There was his
terribly  drastic urging  for  speed, for  a  rapid warning  of the  Second
Foundation?  Why?  Why? Ebling  Mis  died.  The Second  Foundation was  not
warned. And yet the Second Foundation exists."

The Mule smiled in  real pleasure, and with a sudden and surprising dash of
cruelty that  Channis felt  advance and suddenly  withdraw: "But apparently
the Second  Foundation  was warned. Else  how and why did  one Bail Channis
arrive on  Kalgan to handle my men and to  assume the rather thankless task
of   outwitting   me.  The   warning   came   too  late,   that  is   all."

"Then," and  Channis allowed  pity to drench  outward from him,  "you don't
even know what the  Second Foundation is, or anything of the deeper meaning
of all that has been going on."

To gain time!

The  Mule  felt  the  other's pity,  and  his  eyes  narrowed with  instant
hostility. He  rubbed his  nose in his familiar  four-fingered gesture, and
snapped:  "Amuse   yourself,  then.   What   of   the  Second  Foundation?"

Channis spoke deliberately, in words rather than in emotional symbology. He
said:  "From what  I have  heard, it  was the  mystery that  surrounded the
Second Foundation that most  puzzled Mis. Hari Seldon founded his two units
so differently.  The First Foundation  was a splurge that  in two centuries
dazzled  half  the Galaxy.  And  the Second  was  an abyss  that was  dark.

"You  won't understand  why that was,  unless you  can once again  feel the
intellectual atmosphere  of the days of the dying Empire.  It was a time of
absolutes, of  the great final generalities, at least  in thought. It was a
sign of  decaying culture, of course, that dams  had been built against the
further development  of ideas.  It was his  revolt against these  dams that
made Seldon famous. It  was that one last spark of youthful creation in him
that lit the Empire  in a sunset glow and dimly foreshadowed the rising sun
of the Second Empire."

"Very dramatic. So what?"

"So he created his  Foundations according to the laws of psychohistory, but
who  knew better  than he  that even  those laws  were relative.  He  never
created a  finished product. Finished products  are for decadent minds. His
was an  evolving mechanism and the Second  Foundation was the instrument of
that evolution. We, First Citizen of your Temporary Union of Worlds, we are
the guardians of Seldon's Plan. Only we!"

"Are  you  trying  to  talk  yourself  into courage,"  inquired  the  Mule,
contemptuously,  "or  are  you   trying  to  impress  me?  For  the  Second
Foundation,  Seldon's Plan,  the  Second Empire  all impresses  me  not the
least, nor touches any  spring of compassion, sympathy, responsibility, nor
any other  source of emotional aid  you may be trying to  tap in me. And in
any case, poor fool,  speak of the Second Foundation in the past tense, for
it is destroyed."

Channis felt  the emotional  potential that pressed  upon his mind  rise in
intensity as  the Mule rose from  his chair and approached.  He fought back
furiously, but  something crept  relentlessly on within  him, battering and
bending his mind back  and back.

He felt  the wall behind him,  and the Mule faced  him, skinny arms akimbo,
lips smiling terribly beneath that mountain of nose.

The Mule  said: "Your game is  through, Channis. The game  of all of you-of
all the men of  what used to be the Second Foundation. Used  to be! Used to
be!

"What were you sitting  here waiting for all this time, with your babble to
Pritcher, when  you might have struck  him down and taken  the blaster from
him without  the least effort of  physical force? You were  waiting for me,
weren't you,  waiting to greet me in a situation  that would not too arouse
my suspicions.

"Too bad  for you that  I needed no arousal.  I knew you. I  knew you well,
Channis of the Second Foundation.

"But what are you waiting for now? You still throw words at me desperately,
as though the mere  sound of your voice would freeze me to my seat. And all
the while  you speak, something in your mind is  waiting and waiting and is
still waiting.  But no  one is coming. None  of those you expect   none of
your allies. You are alone here, Channis, and you will remain alone. Do you
know why?

"It is because your Second Foundation miscalculated me to the very dregs of
the end. I knew  their plan early. They thought I would follow you here and
be proper meat  for their cooking. You were to be a  decoy indeed  a decoy
for a poor, foolish  weakling mutant, so hot on the trail of Empire that he
would  fall  blindly  into  an  obvious  pit.  But  am  I  their  prisoner?

"I wonder if it occurred to them that Id scarcely be here without my fleet
  against  the artillery  of  any  unit of  which  they  are entirely  and
pitifully  helpless?  Did it  occur  to them  that  I would  not pause  for
discussion or wait for events?

"My  ships were  launched  against Tazenda  twelve hours  ago and  they are
quite,  quite through  with their  mission. Tazenda  is laid in  ruins; its
centers of  population are wiped  out. There was no  resistance. The Second
Foundation no longer exists,  Channis  and I, the queer, ugly weakling, am
the ruler of the Galaxy."

Channis   could  do  nothing   but  shake   his  head  feebly.   "No  No"

"Yes Yes" mimicked the  Mule. "And if you are the last one alive, and you
may be, that will not be for long either."

And then there followed  a short, pregnant pause, and Channis almost howled
with the  sudden pain of that tearing  penetration of the innermost tissues
of his mind.

The  Mule drew back  and muttered: "Not  enough. You  do not pass  the test
after  all.  Your  despair   is  pretense.  Your  fear  is  not  the  broad
overwhelming  that adheres  to the  destruction of  an ideal, but  the puny
seeping fear of personal destruction."

And the  Mules weak hand seized Channis by the throat  in a puny grip that
Channis was somehow unable to break.

"You are  my insurance, Channis. You are  my director and safeguard against
any  underestimation I  may  make." The  Mule's  eyes bore  down upon  him.
Insistent Demanding

"Have  I calculated  rightly,  Channis? Have  I outwitted  your men  of the
Second Foundation?  Tazenda is destroyed,  Channis, tremendously destroyed;
so why is your  despair pretense? Where is the reality? I must have reality
and truth!  Talk, Channis talk. Have I  penetrated then, not deeply enough?
Does  the danger  still exist?  Talk,  Channis.  Where have I  done wrong?"

Channis felt the words  drag out of his mouth. They did not come willingly.
He  clenched his  teeth against them.  He bit  his tongue. He  tensed every
muscle of his throat.

And they  came out  gasping   pulled out by  force and tearing his throat
and tongue and teeth on the way.

"Truth," he squeaked, "truth"

"Yes, truth. What is left to be done?"

"Seldon founded Second Foundation here. Here, as I said. I told no lie. The
psychologists  arrived   and  took  control  of   the  native  population."

"Of  Tazenda?" The  Mule plunged  deeply into  the flooding torture  of the
other's emotional  upwellings  tearing at them  brutally. "It is Tazenda I
have destroyed. You know what I want. Give it to me."

"Not Tazenda. I  said Second Foundationers might not be those apparently in
power; Tazenda  is the  figurehead" The words  were almost unrecognizable,
forming themselves  against every atom of  will of the Second Foundationer,
"Rossem Rossem Rossem is the world"

The  Mule loosed his  grip and Channis  dropped into  a huddle of  pain and
torture.

"And you thought to fool me?" said the Mule, softly.

"You  were fooled." It  was the last dying  shred of resistance in Channis.

"But  not long  enough for  you and  yours. I  am in communication  with my
Fleet. And after Tazenda can come Rossem. But first"

Channis felt the excruciating  darkness rise against him, and the automatic
lift  of his  arm to  his tortured  eyes could  not ward  it off. It  was a
darkness  that throttled,  and  as he  felt his  tom, wounded  mind reeling
backwards,  backwards into  the everlasting  black   there was  that final
picture of  the triumphant Mule   laughing matchstick   that long, fleshy
nose quivering with laughter.

The   sound    faded   away.   The   darkness    embraced   him   lovingly.

It  ended with a  cracking sensation that  was like  the jagged glare  of a
lightning  flash, and  Channis came  slowly to  earth while  sight returned
painfully    in   blurry    transmission   through    tear-drenched   eyes.

His head  ached unbearably,  and it was only  with a stab of  agony that he
could bring up a hand to it.

Obviously, he was alive.  Softly, like feathers caught up in an eddy of air
that had passed, his thoughts steadied and drifted to rest. He felt comfort
suck in   from outside. Slowly, torturedly, he bent  his neck  and relief
was a sharp pang.

For  the  door was  open;  and  the First  Speaker  stood  just inside  the
threshold. He tried to  speak, to shout, to warn  but his tongue froze and
he knew  that a part of  the Mule's mighty mind  still held him and clamped
all speech within him.

He bent  his neck once more.  The Mule was still in  the room. He was angry
and hot-eyed. He laughed no longer, but his teeth were bared in a ferocious
smile.

Channis felt  the First  Speaker's mental influence moving  gently over his
mind with  a healing touch and  then there was the  numbing sensation as it
came into  contact with the Mule's  defense for an instant  of struggle and
withdrew.

The Mule said gratingly, with a fury that was grotesque in his meagre body:
"Then another  comes to greet me." His agile  mind reached its tendrils out
of the room out out

"You are alone," he said.

And the  First Speaker  interrupted with an acquiescence:  "I am thoroughly
alone. It  is necessary that I  be alone, since it  was I who miscalculated
your future five years  ago. There would be a certain satisfaction to me in
correcting that  matter without aid. Unfortunately, I  did not count on the
strength of  your Field of Emotional  Repulsion that surrounded this place.
It took me long  to penetrate. I congratulate you upon the skill with which
it was constructed."

"Thank you for nothing,"  came the hostile rejoinder. "Bandy no compliments
with me. Have you come to add your brain splinter to that of yonder cracked
pillar of your realm?"

The First Speaker smiled: "Why, the man you call Bail Channis performed his
mission well, the more  so since he was not your mental equal by far. I can
see, of  course, that  you have mistreated him,  yet it may be  that we may
restore him fully even yet. He is a brave man, sir. He volunteered for this
mission although we were  able to predict mathematically the huge chance of
damage to his mind   a more fearful alternative than that of mere physical
crippling."

Channis' mind pulsed futilely  with what he wanted to say and couldn't; the
warning  he wished  to shout  and was  unable to.  He could only  emit that
continuous stream of fear fear

The Mule  was calm. "You know,  of course, of the  destruction of Tazenda."

"I do. The assault by your fleet was foreseen."

Grimly: "Yes, so I suppose. But not prevented, eh?"

"No, not prevented." The  First Speaker's emotional symbology was plain. It
was almost  a self-horror; a complete self-disgust:  "And the fault is much
more mine  than yours. Who could have imagined  your powers five years ago.
We suspected  from the start   from the moment you  captured Kalgan  that
you had the powers of emotional control. That was not too surprising, First
Citizen, as I can explain to you.

"Emotional contact such as you and I possess is not a very new development.
Actually it is implicit in the human brain. Most humans can read emotion in
a primitive manner by  associating it pragmatically with facial expression,
tone  of voice  and so  on. A good  many animals  possess the faculty  to a
higher  degree; they  use  the sense  of smell  to  a good  extent  and the
emotions involved are, of course, less complex.

"Actually,  humans are  capable  of much  more, but  the faculty  of direct
emotional  contact  tended to  atrophy  with  the development  of speech  a
million years back. It  has been the great advance of our Second Foundation
that  this  forgotten sense  has  been restored  to  at least  some of  its
potentialities.

"But  we are  not born with  its full use.  A million  years of decay  is a
formidable  obstacle, and  we  must educate  the sense,  exercise it  as we
exercise our muscles. And there you have the main difference. You were born
with it.

"So much  we could calculate. We could also calculate  the effect of such a
sense upon  a person in a  world of men who did  not possess it. The seeing
man  in the  kingdom  of the  blind We  calculated the  extent to  which a
megalomania would take control  of you and we thought we were prepared. But
for two factors we were not prepared.

"The  first was the  great extent of  your sense.  We can  induce emotional
contact only  when in  eyeshot, which is  why we are  more helpless against
physical weapons  than you might think. Sight  plays such an enormous part.
Not so  with you. You are  definitely known to have  had men under control,
and, further, to have  had intimate emotional contact with them when out of
sight and out of earshot. That was discovered too late.

"Secondly, we did not  know of your physical shortcomings, particularly the
one that seemed so important to you, that you adopted the name of the Mule.
We didn't  foresee that you were not merely a  mutant, but a sterile mutant
and the added psychic  distortion due to your inferiority complex passed us
by. We  allowed only for a megalomania   not for an intensely psychopathic
paranoia as well.

"It is myself that bears the responsibility for having missed all that, for
I was  the leader of the  Second Foundation when you  captured Kalgan. When
you destroyed  the First Foundation, we found out  but  too late  and for
that fault millions have died on Tazenda."

"And you  will correct  things now?" The  Mules thin lips  curled, his mind
pulsing with hate: "What  will you do? Fatten me? Restore me to a masculine
vigor? Take  away from my past the long  childhood in an alien environment.
Do you regret my sufferings? Do you regret my unhappiness? I have no sorrow
for what  I did in my  necessity. Let the Galaxy  Protect itself as best it
can,  since it  stirred not  a whit  for my  protection when I  needed it."

Your emotions  are, of course," said the  First Speaker, "only the children
of  your background  and  are not  to be  condemned   merely  changed. The
destruction of  Tazenda was unavoidable. The  alternative would have been a
much greater  destruction generally throughout the  Galaxy over a period of
centuries. We did our best in our limited way. We withdrew as many men from
Tazenda as we could. We decentralized the rest of the world. Unfortunately,
our measures were of  necessity far from adequate. It left many millions to
die  do you not regret that?"

"Not at all   any more than I regret the hundred thousand that must die on
Rossem in not more than six hours."

"On Rossem?" said the First Speaker, quickly.

He turned  to Channis who  had forced himself into  a half-sitting posture,
and his mind exerted its force. Channis, felt the duel of minds strain over
him, and  then there  was a short snapping  of the bond and  the words came
tumbling out  of his  mouth: "Sir, I  have failed completely.  He forced it
from me  not ten minutes before your arrival. I could  not resist him and I
offer no  excuses. He knows Tazenda is not  the Second Foundation. He knows
that Rossem is."

And the bonds closed down upon him again.

The  First Speaker frowned:  "I see. What  is it  you are planning  to do?"

"Do you  really wonder?  Do you really  find it difficult  to penetrate the
obvious?  All this  time  that you  have preached  to me  of the  nature of
emotional contact  all this time that you have been throwing words such as
megalomania and paranoia at me, I have been working. I have been in contact
with my Fleet and it has its orders. In six hours, unless I should for some
reason counteract my orders,  they are to bombard all of Rossem except this
lone village and an area of a hundred square miles about it. They are to do
a thorough job and are then to land here.

"You have  six hours, and in  six hours, you cannot  beat down my mind, nor
can you save the rest of Rossem."

The Mule spread his  hands and laughed again while the First Speaker seemed
to   find   difficulty   in   absorbing   this  new   state   of   affairs.

He said: "The alternative?"

"Why should  there even be an  alternative? I can stand  to gain no more by
any alternative.  Is it  the lives of those  on Rossem I'm to  be chary of?
Perhaps if you allow  my ships to land and submit, all of you  all the men
on the  Second Foundation  to mental control  sufficient to suit myself, I
may countermand the bombardment orders. It may be worthwhile to put so many
men of  high intelligence  under my control.  But then again it  would be a
considerable  effort  and  perhaps  not worth  it  after  all,  so I'm  not
particularly  eager  to have  you  agree to  it.  What do  you say,  Second
Foundationer? What  weapon have you against  my mind which is  as strong as
yours at  least and against my  ships which are stronger  than anything you
have ever dreamed of possessing?"

"What have I?" repeated  the First Speaker, slowly: "Why nothing  except a
little grain   such a little  grain of knowledge that  even yet you do not
possess."

"Speak quickly,"  laughed the  Mule, "speak inventively. For  squirm as you
might, you won't squirm out of this."

"Poor mutant,"  said the First Speaker,  "I have nothing to  squirm out of.
Ask  yourself   why was  Bail Channis  sent to  Kalgan as  a decoy   Bail
Channis, who though young  and brave is almost as much your mental inferior
as is this sleeping  officer of yours, this Han Pritcher. Why did not I go,
or   another   of   our   leaders,  who   would   be   more  your   match?"

"Perhaps," came  the supremely confident reply,  "you were not sufficiently
foolish, since perhaps none of you are my match."

"The  true  reason  is  more logical.  You  knew  Channis  to  be a  Second
Foundationer. He  lacked the capacity to hide that  from you. And you knew,
too, that  you were his superior,  so you were not  afraid to play his game
and follow him as he wished you to in order to outwit him later. Had I gone
to Kalgan, you would have killed me for I would have been a real danger, or
had I  avoided death by concealing my identity, I  would yet have failed in
persuading you to follow  me into space. It was only known inferiority that
lured you  on. And  had you remained  on Kalgan, not  all the  force of the
Second Foundation  could have  harmed you, surrounded  as you were  by your
men, your machines, and your mental power."

"My mental power is  yet with me, squirmer," said the Mule, "and my men and
machines are not far off."

"Truly  so, but  you are  not on  Kalgan. You  are here  in the  Kingdom of
Tazenda,  logically  presented  to  you as  the  Second  Foundation   very
logically presented.  It had  to be so  presented, for you are  a wise man,
First Citizen, and would follow only logic."

"Correct, and it was a momentary victory for your side, but there was still
time for  me to worm the truth from your man,  Channis, and still wisdom in
me to realize that such a truth might exist."

"And  on   our  side,   oh,  not-quite-sufficiently-subtle  one,   was  the
realization that you might go that one step further and so Bail Channis was
prepared for you."

"That  he most certainly  was not, for  I stripped  his brain clean  as any
plucked  chicken. It  quivered bare  and open  before me  and when  he said
Rossem was  the Second Foundation, it was basic truth  for I had ground him
so  flat and  smooth that  not the  smidgeon of  a deceit could  have found
refuge in any microscopic crevice."

"True enough.  So much  the better for  our foresight. For I  have told you
already  that Bail  Channis was  a volunteer.  Do you  know what sort  of a
volunteer? Before  he left our Foundation for  Kalgan and you, he submitted
to emotional surgery of a drastic nature. Do you think it was sufficient to
deceive you? Do you  think Bail Channis, mentally untouched, could possibly
deceive  you?  No, Bail  Channis  was  himself deceived,  of necessity  and
voluntarily. Down  to the  inmost core of  his mind, Bail  Channis honestly
believes that Rossem is the Second Foundation.

"And for  three years  now, we of  the Second Foundation have  built up the
appearance  of that  here  in the  Kingdom of  Tazenda, in  preparation and
waiting  for you.  And we have  succeeded, have  we not? You  penetrated to
Tazenda, and  beyond that,  to Rossem   but past that, you  could not go."

The Mule was upon  his feet: "You dare tell me that Rossem also, is not the
Second Foundation?"

Channis, from  the floor, felt his bonds burst for  good, under a stream of
mental force on the  part of the First Speaker and strained upright. He let
out  one  long,  incredulous  cry: "You  mean  Rossem  is   not the  Second
Foundation?"

The  memories of  life, the knowledge  of his  mind  everything   whirled
mistily about him in confusion.

The First  Speaker smiled: "You see, First Citizen,  Channis is as upset as
you  are. Of  course, Rossem is  not the  Second Foundation. Are  we madmen
then, to lead you, our greatest, most powerful, most dangerous enemy to our
own world? Oh, no!

"Let your Fleet bombard  Rossem, First Citizen, if you must have it so. Let
them  destroy all  they can.  For at  most they  can kill only  Channis and
myself  and that  will leave you in a situation improved not in the least.

"For the  Second Foundation's Expedition to Rossem  which has been here for
three  years and has  functioned, temporarily,  as Elders in  this village,
embarked yesterday and are returning to Kalgan. They will evade your Fleet,
of course,  and they will arrive  in Kalgan at least  a day before you can,
which is why I  tell you all this. Unless I countermand my orders, when you
return, you  will find a revolting Empire,  a disintegrated realm, and only
the men  with you  in your Fleet  here will be  loyal to you.  They will be
hopelessly outnumbered. And moreover, the men of the Second Foundation will
be with your Home  Fleet and will see to it that you reconvert no one. Your
Empire is done, mutant."

Slowly, the  Mule bowed  his head, as  anger and despair  cornered his mind
completely, "Yes. Too late Too late Now I see it."

"Now  you  see  it,"  agreed  the  First  Speaker,  "and  now  you  don't."

In the  despair of  that moment, when  the Mule's mind lay  open, the First
Speaker   ready  for  that moment  and pre-sure  of  its nature   entered
quickly.  It  required  a  rather insignificant  fraction  of  a second  to
consummate the change completely.

The  Mule   looked  up   and  said:  "Then   I  shall  return   to  Kalgan?

"Certainly. How do you feel?"

"Excellently well." His brow puckered: "Who are you?"

"Does it matter?"

"Of course not." He  dismissed the matter, and touched Pritcher's shoulder:
"Wake up, Pritcher, we're going home."

It  was two hours  later that Bail  Channis felt  strong enough to  walk by
himself. He said: "He won't ever remember?"

"Never. He  retains his mental powers and his  Empire  but his motivations
are now entirely different. The notion of a Second Foundation is a blank to
him, and he  is a man of peace. He will be  a far happier man henceforward,
too, for  the few years of  life left him by  his maladjusted physique. And
then,   after  he   is  dead   Seldon's  Plan   will  go  on     somehow."

"And it is true,"  urged Channis, "it is true that Rossem is not the Second
Foundation?  I could  swear   I tell  you I  know  it  is. I am  not mad."

"You are  not mad, Channis, merely, as I have said,  changed. Rossem is not
the Second Foundation. Come! We, too, will return home."

                               LAST INTERLUDE

Bail  Channis sat  in the small  white-tiled room  and allowed his  mind to
relax. He was content  to live in the present. There were the walls and the
window and  the grass  outside. They had  no names. They  were just things.
There was a bed  and a chair an books that developed themselves idly on the
screen at  the foot  of his bed.  There was the  nurse who  brought him his
food.

At first he had  made efforts to piece together the scraps of things he had
heard. Such as those two men talking together.

One had said: "Complete  aphasia now. Its cleaned out, and I think without
damage. It  will only be necessary to return  the recording of his original
brain-wave makeup."

He remembered the sounds  by rote, and for some reason they seemed peculiar
sounds  as if they meant something. But why bother.

Better to watch the pretty changing colors on the screen at the foot of the
thing he lay on.

And then  someone entered  and did things  to him and  for a  long time, he
slept.

And when that had  passed, the bed was suddenly a bed and he knew he was in
a hospital, and the words he remembered made sense.

He sat up: "What's happening?"

The First Speaker was beside him, "You're on the Second Foundation, and you
have your mind back  your original mind."

"Yes! Yes!"  Channis came to the realization that he was himself, and there
was incredible triumph and joy in that.

"And now  tell me," said the  First Speaker, "do you  know where the Second
Foundation is now?"

And the  truth came flooding down in one enormous  wave and Channis did not
answer.  Like Ebling  Mis before him,  he was  conscious of only  one vast,
numbing surprise.

Until he  finally nodded,  and said: "By the  Stars of the Galaxy   now, I
know."

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                  PART II

                          SEARCH BY THE FOUNDATION

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                     7

                                  Arcadia

DARELL, ARKADY novelist, born 11, 5, 362 F.E., died 1, 7, 443 F.E. Although
primarily  a  writer  of  fiction, Arkady  Darell  is  best  known for  her
biography   of  her   grandmother,  Bayta   Darell.  Based   on  first-hand
information, it has for centuries served as a primary source of information
concerning the  Mule and his times. ...  Like "Unkeyed Memories", her novel
"Time  and  Time  and  Over" is  a  stirring  reflection  of the  brilliant
Kalganian society  of the early Interregnum, based, it  is said, on a visit
to Kalgan in her youth....

ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA

Arcadia  Darell declaimed  firmly into  the mouthpiece of  her transcriber:

"The Future  of Seldon's Plan, by  A. Darell" and then  thought darkly that
some day when she  was a great writer, she would write all her masterpieces
under  the  pseudonym  of  Arkady.  Just  Arkady.  No  last  name  at  all.

"A. Darell" would  be just the sort of thing that  she would have to put on
all her  themes for her class  in Composition and Rhetoric   so tasteless.
All the other kids  had to do it, too, except for Olynthus Dam, because the
class laughed so when  he did it the first time, And "Arcadia" was a little
girls  name, wished on  her because  her great-grandmother had  been called
that; her parents just had no imagination at all.

Now that  she was two days past fourteen,  you'd think they'd recognize the
simple fact  of adulthood  and call her  Arkady. Her lips  tightened as she
thought of  her father looking up from his  book-viewer just long enough to
say, "But  if you're going  to pretend you're nineteen,  Arcadia, what will
you  do when  you're  twenty-five and  all the  boys think  you're thirty?"

From  where she sprawled  across the arms  and into  the hollow of  her own
special armchair,  she could see the mirror on her  dresser. Her foot was a
little in  the way  because her house  slipper kept twirling  about her big
toe, so  she pulled it in and sat up with  an unnatural straightness to her
neck that she felt sure, somehow, lengthened it a full two inches into slim
regality.

For a  moment, she considered her  face thoughtfully  too  fat. She opened
her jaws half an inch behind closed lips, and caught the resultant trace of
unnatural gauntness at every  angle. She licked her lips with a quick touch
of  tongue and  let them  pout a bit  in moist  softness. Then she  let her
eyelids droop in a weary, worldly way Oh, golly if only her cheeks weren't
that silly pink.

She tried  putting her fingers to  the outer comers of  her eye and tilting
the lids  a bit to get  that mysterious exotic languor  of the women of the
inner star systems, but  her hands were in the way and she couldn't see her
face very well.

Then she  lifted her chin, caught  herself at a half-profile,  and with her
eyes  a little  strained from looking  out the  comer and her  neck muscles
faintly aching,  she said, in a  voice one octave below  its natural pitch,
"Really, father, if you  think it makes a particle of difference to me what
some silly old boys think you just"

And then she remembered that she still had the transmitter open in her hand
and said, drearily, "Oh, golly," and shut it off.

The faintly violet paper with the peach margin line on the left had upon it
the following:

                        "THE FUTURE OF SELDON'S PLAN

"Really, father, if you  think it makes a particle of difference to me what
some silly old boys think you just

"Oh, golly."

She pulled the sheet  out of the machine with annoyance and another clicked
neatly into place.

But  her face  smoothed out  of its  vexation, nevertheless, and  her wide,
little  mouth stretched  into a  self-satisfied smile.  She sniffed  at the
paper delicately. just right. Just that proper touch of elegance and charm.
And the penmanship was just the last word.

The machine  had been delivered two  days ago on her  first adult birthday.
She had said, "But  father, everybody  just everybody in the class who has
the slightest  pretensions to  being  anybody has one. Nobody  but some old
drips would use hand machines"

The salesman had said,  "There is no other model as compact on the one hand
and  as adaptable  on  the other.  It  will spell  and punctuate  correctly
according to  the sense  of the sentence.  Naturally, it is a  great aid to
education since  it encourages  the user to employ  careful enunciation and
breathing in order to  make sure of the correct spelling, to say nothing of
demanding  a   proper  and  elegant  delivery   for  correct  punctuation."

Even then  her father had tried to get one geared  for type-print as if she
were some dried-up, old-maid teacher.

But when  it was delivered, it was the model  she wanted  obtained perhaps
with a  little more wail and sniffle than quite  went with the adulthood of
fourteen   and  copy was turned  out in  a charming and  entirely feminine
handwriting, with  the most beautifully graceful  capitals anyone ever saw.

Even the phrase, "Oh, golly." somehow breathed glamour when the Transcriber
was done with it.

But just  the same she had  to get it right, so she  sat up straight in her
chair, placed her first draft before her in businesslike fashion, and began
again, crisply  and clearly;  her abdomen flat,  her chest lifted,  and her
breathing  carefully   controlled.  She  intoned,   with  dramatic  fervor:

The Future of Seldon's Plan.

"The Foundation's  past history is, I am sure, well-known  to all of us who
have  had the  good fortune to  be educated  in our planet's  efficient and
well-staffed school system.

(There! That would start  things off right with Miss Erlking, that mean old
hag.)

That past  history is  largely the past  history of the great  Plan of Hari
Seldon. The two are  one. But the question in the mind of most people today
is whether  this Plan will continue in all its  great wisdom, or whether it
will  be foully  destroyed,  or, perhaps,  has been  so  destroyed already.

"To  understand this,  it  may be  best to  pass quickly  over some  of the
highlights  of the  Plan  as it  has been  revealed  to humanity  thus far.

(This  part was  easy  because she  had taken  Modern History  the semester
before.)

"In the days, nearly four centuries ago, when the First Galactic Empire was
decaying into the paralysis  that preceded final death, one man  the great
Hari  Seldon    foresaw  the  approaching  end.  Through  the  science  of
psychohistory, the  intrissacies of  whose mathematics has  long since been
forgotten,

(She  paused in  a trifle  of doubt.  She was  sure that  "intricacies" was
pronounced with soft  c's but the spelling didn't look right. Oh, well, the
machine couldn't very well be wrong)

he and the  men who worked with him are able to  foretell the course of the
great social and economic  currents sweeping the Galaxy at the time. It was
possible for  them to realize that, left to  itself, the Empire would break
up, and  that thereafter there would  be at least thirty  thousand years of
anarchic   chaos   prior   to   the   establishment  of   a   new   Empire.

"It was  too late to prevent the great Fall, but  it was still possible, at
least,  to  cut short  the  intermediate  period of  chaos.  The Plan  was,
therefore,  evolved whereby  only  a single  millennium would  separate the
Second Empire from the  First. We are completing the fourth century of that
millennium, and many generations  of men have lived and died while the Plan
has continued its inexorable workings.

"Hari  Seldon  established two  Foundations  at  the opposite  ends of  the
Galaxy, in  a manner and under  such circumstances as would  yield the best
mathematical solution  for his  psychohistorical problem. In one  of these,
our Foundation,  established here  on Terminus, there  was concentrated the
physical science of the Empire, and through the possession of that science,
the Foundation was able  to withstand the attacks of the barbarous kingdoms
which  had broken  away and  become independent,  out at  the hinge  of the
Empire.

"The Foundation, indeed, was  able to conquer in its turn these short-lived
kingdoms by means of the leadership of a series of wise and heroic men like
Salvor  Hardin  and  Hober  Mallow who  were  able  to  interpret the  Plan
intelligently and to guide our land through its

(She  had written  "intricacies" here also,  but decided  not to risk  it a
second time.)

complications.  All  our  planets  still  revere  their  memories  although
centuries have passed.

"Eventually,   the  Foundation   established  a  commercial   system  which
controlled a large portion  of the Siwennian and Anacreonian sectors of the
Galaxy, and  even defeated  the remnants of  the old Empire  under its last
great  general,  Bel Riose.  It  seemed  that nothing  could  now stop  the
workings of Seldon's plan. Every crisis that Seldon had planned had come at
its  appropriate time  and  had been  solved,  and with  each solution  the
Foundation had  taken another giant stride  toward Second Empire and peace.

"And then,

(Her breath came short  at this point, and she hissed the word, between her
teeth,  but  the  Transmitter simply  wrote  them  calmly and  gracefully.)

with  the  last remnants  of  the  dead First  Empire  gone  and with  only
ineffectual warlords ruling over  the splinters and remnants of the decayed
colossus,

(She got that phrase out of a thriller on the video last week, but old Miss
Erlking never  listened to anything but  symphonies and lectures, so  she'd
never know.)

there came the Mule.

"This strange  man was not allowed for in the Plan.  He was a mutant, whose
birth could not have been predicted. He had strange and mysterious power of
controlling and  manipulating human emotions and  in this manner could bend
all men  to his will.  With breath-taking swiftness, he  became a conqueror
and Empire-builder, until, finally, he even defeated the Foundation itself.

"Yet he never obtained  universal dominion, since in his first overpowering
lunge  he  was  stopped   by  the  wisdom  and  daring  of  a  great  woman

(Now there  was that old problem again. Father  would insist that she never
bring up  the fact  that she was  the grandchild of  Bayta Darell. Everyone
knew it and Bayta  was just about the greatest woman there ever was and she
had stopped the Mule singlehanded.)

in a manner  the true story of which is known in  its entirety to very few.

(There! If  she had to read  it to the class, that last  could he said in a
dark voice,  and someone would be sure to ask what  the true story was, and
then  well, and  then she couldn't help tell the  truth if they asked her,
could she? In her  mind, she was already wordlessly whizzing through a hurt
and  eloquent  explanation to  a  stern and  questioning paternal  parent.)

"After  five  years of  restricted  rule,  another change  took place,  the
reasons  for which  are not  known, and  the Mule  abandoned all  plans for
further conquest. His last  five years were those of an enlightened despot.

"It is  said by some that  the change in the Mule  was brought about by the
intervention of the Second  Foundation. However, no man has ever discovered
the exact location of  this other Foundation, nor knows its exact function,
so that theory remains unproven.

"A whole  generation has  passed since the  death of the Mule.  What of the
future, then,  now that he has come and  gone? He interrupted Seldon's Plan
and  seemed to  have burst  it to fragments,  yet as  soon as he  died, the
Foundation rose  again, like  a nova from  the dead ashes of  a dying star.

(She had made that up herself.)

Once  again,  the  planet  Terminus  houses  the  center  of  a  commercial
federation almost  as great  and as rich  as before the  conquest, and even
more peaceful and democratic.

"Is this  planned? Is Seldon's great  dream still alive, and  will a Second
Galactic  Empire yet  be  formed six  hundred  years from  now? I,  myself,
believe so, because

(This was  the important  part. Miss Erlking  always had those  large, ugly
red-pencil scrawls that went:  'But this is only descriptive. What are your
personal  reactions? Think!  Express  yourself! Penetrate  your own  soul!'
Penetrate your  own soul. A lot  she knew about  souls, with her lemon face
that never smiled in its life)

never at  any time has the  political situation been so  favorable. The old
Empire is  completely dead and the period of the Mule's  rule put an end to
the era of warlords  that preceded him. Most of the surrounding portions of
the Galaxy are civilized and peaceful.

"Moreover the internal health of the Foundation is better than ever before.
The despotic times of  the pre-Conquest hereditary mayors have given way to
the  democratic elections  of early  times. There  are no  longer dissident
worlds of  independent Traders;  no longer the  injustices and dislocations
that  accompanied accumulations  of  great wealth  in the  hands of  a few.

"There is no reason, therefore, to fear failure, unless it is true that the
Second  Foundation itself  presents a  danger. Those  who think so  have no
evidence to  back their claim, but merely  vague fears and superstitions. I
think that our confidence in ourselves, in our nation, and in Hari Seldon's
great Plan  should drive  from our hearts  and minds all  uncertainties and

(Hm-m-m. This  was awfully corny,  but something like this  was expected at
the end.)

so I say"

That  is as  far  as "The  Future of  Seldon's Plan"  got, at  that moment,
because there  was the gentlest little tap on  the window, and when Arcadia
shot up to a  balance on one arm of the chair, she found herself confronted
by  a  smiling  face  beyond  the  glass,  its  even  symmetry  of  feature
interestingly accentuated  by the  short, vertical fine of  a finger before
its lips.

With  the slight  pause necessary  to assume  an attitude  of bepuzzlement,
Arcadia dismounted from the  armchair, walked to the couch that fronted the
wide  window that  held the  apparition and,  kneeling upon it,  stared out
thoughtfully.

The smile upon the  man's face faded quickly. While the fingers of one hand
tightened whitely  upon the sill,  the other made a  quick gesture. Arcadia
obeyed  calmly, and  closed the  latch that  moved the  lower third  of the
window smoothly  into its socket in the wall,  allowing the warm spring air
to interfere with the conditioning within.

"You can't  get in," she said, with  comfortable smugness. "The windows are
all screened, and keyed only to people who belong here. If you come in, all
sorts of alarms will  break loose." A pause, then she added, "You look sort
of  silly balancing  on  that ledge  underneath the  window. If  you're not
careful, you'll  fall and break your  neck and a lot  of valuable flowers."

"In that case," said the man at the window, who had been thinking that very
thing  with a slightly different arrangement of adjectives "will you shut
off the screen and let me in?"

"No  use in  doing  that'" said  Arcadia.  "You're probably  thinking of  a
different house, because I'm not the kind of girl who lets strange men into
their ...  her bedroom this time of night." Her eyes,  as she said it, took
on  a  heavy-lidded  sultriness   or  an  unreasonable facsimile  thereof.

All  traces of  humor whatever  had disappeared  from the  young stranger's
face.   He   muttered,   "This   is   Dr.  Darell's   house,   isn't   it?"

"Why should I tell you?"

"Oh, Galaxy Good-by"

"If you  jump off, young man, I will personally  give the alarm." (This was
intended as a refined and sophisticated thrust of irony, since to Arcadia's
enlightened eyes,  the intruder was an obviously  mature thirty, at least 
quite elderly, in fact.)

Quite a  pause. Then, tightly, he  said, "Well, now, look  here, girlie, if
you don't want me  to stay, and don't want me to go, what do you want me to
do?"

"You can come  in, I suppose. Dr. Darell does live  here. Ill shut off the
screen now."

Warily, after  a searching look, the  young man poked his  hand through the
window, then  hunched himself  up and through  it. He brushed  at his knees
with  an  angry, slapping  gesture,  and  lifted a  reddened  face at  her.

"You're  quite sure that  your character  and reputation won't  suffer when
they find me here, are you?"

"Not  as much  as yours  would, because  just as  soon as I  hear footsteps
outside, I'll  just shout  and yell and  say you forced your  way in here."

"Yes?" he  replied with heavy courtesy,  "And how do you  intend to explain
the shut-off protective screen?"

"Poof!  That would  be easy. There  wasn't any  there in the  first place."

The man's eyes were  wide with chagrin. "That was a bluff? How old are you,
kid?"

"I  consider that  a very  impertinent question,  young man.  And I  am not
accustomed to being addressed as 'kid.'"

"I don't wonder. You're probably the Mule's grandmother in disguise. Do you
mind if I leave now before you arrange a lynching party with myself as star
performer?"

"You  had   better  not  leave     because  my  father's  expecting  you."

The man's  look became  a wary one, again.  An eyebrow shot up  as he said,
lightly, "Oh? Anyone with your father?'

"No."

"Anyone called on him lately?'

"Only tradespeople  and you."

"Anything unusual happen at all?"

"Only you."

"Forget me,  will you? No, don't forget me. Tell me,  how did you know your
father was expecting me?"

"Oh, that was easy. Last week, he received a Personal Capsule, keyed to him
personally, with  a self-oxidizing message, you  know. He threw the capsule
shell  into the  Trash Disinto, and  yesterday, he  gave Poli   that's our
maid,  you see    a month's  vacation so  she  could visit  her  sister in
Terminus City, and this afternoon, he made up the bed in the spare room. So
I knew he expected  somebody that I wasn't supposed to know anything about.
Usually, he tells me everything."

"Really!  I'm surprised  he has  to. I  should think you'd  know everything
before he tells you."

'I usually  do." Then she laughed.  She was beginning to  feel very much at
ease. The  visitor was  elderly, but very  distinguished-looking with curly
brown  hair and  very blue eyes.  Maybe she  could meet somebody  like that
again, sometimes, when she was old herself.

"And  just  how,"  he   asked,  "did  you  know  it  was  I  he  expected."

"Well, who else could it be? He was expecting somebody in so secrety a way,
if you know what  I mean  and then you come gumping around trying to sneak
through windows,  instead of  walking through the  front door, the  way you
would if  you had any sense."  She remembered a favorite  line, and used it
promptly. "Men are so stupid!"

"Pretty  stuck on  yourself, aren't you,  kid? I  mean, Miss. You  could be
wrong, you  know. What if I  told you that all this is  a mystery to me and
that  as far as  I know, your  father is  expecting someone else,  not me."

"Oh, I don't think  so. I didn't ask you to come in,  until after I saw you
drop your briefcase."

"My what?"

"Your briefcase, young man.  I'm not blind. You didn't drop it by accident,
because you looked down first, so as to make sure it would land right. Then
you must have realized  it would land just under the hedges and wouldn't be
seen, so you dropped it and didn't look down afterwards. Now since you came
to  the window  instead of  the front door,  it must  mean that you  were a
little  afraid to  trust  yourself in  the house  before  investigating the
place. And  after you had a  little trouble with me,  you took care of your
briefcase  before taking care  of yourself,  which means that  you consider
whatever your briefcase has in it to be more valuable than your own safety,
and  that  means that as  long as you're  in here and the  briefcase is out
there and  we know that  it's out there, you're  probably pretty helpless."

She paused  for a much-needed  breath, and the man  said, grittily, "Except
that I  think I'll choke  you just about medium  dead and get out  of here,
with the briefcase."

"Except,  young man, that  I happen to  have a  baseball bat under  my bed,
which  I can  reach in  two seconds  from where  I'm sitting, and  I'm very
strong for a girl."

Impasse. Finally, with a  strained courtesy, the "young man" said, "Shall I
introduce myself, since we're being so chummy. I'm Pelleas Anthor. And your
name?"

"I'm Arca Arkady Darell. Pleased to meet you."

"And now  Arkady, would  you be a  good little girl and  call your father?"

Arcadia  bridled.  "I'm not  a  little girl.  I  think you're  very rude  
especially when you're asking a favor."

Pelleas Anthor sighed. "Very  well. Would you be a good, kind, dear, little
old   lady,  just  chock   full  of   lavender,  and  call   your  father?"

"That's not  what I meant either, but Ill call him.  Only not so I'll take
my  eyes   off    you ,  young   man."  And  she  stamped   on  the  floor.

There came  the sound of hurrying  footsteps in the hall,  and the door was
flung open.

"Arcadia" There was a  tiny explosion of exhaled air, and Dr. Darell said,
"Who are you, sir?"

Pelleas sprang  to his feet in what was  quite obviously relief. "Dr. Toran
Darell? I  am Pelleas  Anthor. You've received  word about me,  I think. At
least, your daughter says you have."

"My daughter  says I have?" He bent a frowning  glance at her which caromed
harmlessly off  the wide-eyed and impenetrable  web of innocence with which
she met the accusation.

Dr. Darell said, finally: "I have been expecting you. Would you mind coming
down  with me,  please?"  And he  stopped as  his eye  caught a  flicker of
motion, which Arcadia caught simultaneously.

She scrambled  toward her Transcriber, but it  was quite useless, since her
father was  standing right  next to it.  He said, sweetly,  "You've left it
going all this time, Arcadia."

"Father," she squeaked, in  real anguish, "it is very ungentlemanly to read
another  person's  private  correspondence,  especially when  it's  talking
correspondence."

"Ah," said her father,  "but 'talking correspondence' with a strange man in
your  bedroom! As  a  father, Arcadia,  I must  protect you  against evil."

"Oh, golly  it was nothing like that."

Pelleas laughed  suddenly, "Oh, but it was, Dr.  Darell. The young lady was
going to accuse me  of all sorts of things, and I must insist that you read
it, if only to clear my name."

"Oh" Arcadia  held back  her tears with  an effort. Her  own father didn't
even trust her. And that darned Transcriber If that silly fool hadn't come
gooping at  the window, and making  her forget to turn  it off. And now her
father would be making long, gentle speeches about what young ladies aren't
supposed to  do. There  just wasn't anything they  were supposed  to do, it
looked like, except choke and die, maybe.

"Arcadia,"  said her  father, gently,  "it strikes  me that a  young lady"

She knew it. She knew it.

"should  not   be  quite  so  impertinent  to   men  older  than  she  is.

"Well, what did he  want to come peeping around my window for? A young lady
has a  right to  privacy Now I'll  have to do my  whole darned composition
over."

"It's not up to you to question his propriety in coming to your window. You
should simply  not have let him  in. You should have  called me instantly 
especially if you thought I was expecting him."

She  said, peevishly, "It's  just as well  if you  didn't see him   stupid
thing.  Hell give the  whole thing away  if he  keeps on going  to windows,
instead of doors."

"Arcadia,  nobody  wants your  opinion  on  matters you  know nothing  of."

"I   do,  too.   It's   the  Second   Foundation,  that's   what   it  is."

There was  a silence.  Even Arcadia felt  a little nervous  stirring in her
abdomen.

Dr. Darell said, softly, "Where have you heard this?"

"Nowheres, but what else is there to be so secret about? And you don't have
to worry that Ill tell anyone."

"Mr.  Anthor,"   said  Dr.  Darell,  "I   must  apologize  for  all  this."

"Oh,  that's all right,"  came Anthor's  rather hollow response.  "It's not
your fault if she's sold herself to the forces of darkness. But do you mind
if I ask her a question before we go. Miss Arcadia"

"What do you want?"

"Why  do you  think it  is stupid to  go to  windows instead of  to doors?"

"Because  you advertise  what you're  trying to  hide, silly.  If I  have a
secret, I  don't put  tape over my  mouth and let  everyone  know I  have a
secret. I talk just as much as usual, only about something else. Didn't you
ever read any of  the sayings of Salvor Hardin? He was our first Mayor, you
know."

"Yes, I know."

"Well, he  used to say that  only a he that  wasn't ashamed of itself could
possibly succeed. He also  said that nothing had to be true, but everything
had to  sound  true. Well,  when you come  in through a window,  it's a lie
that's ashamed of itself and it doesn't sound true."

"Then what would you have done?"

"If I had wanted to see my father on top secret business, I would have made
his acquaintance openly and seen him about all sorts of strictly legitimate
things. And then when everyone knew all about you and connected you with my
father as  a matter of course,  you could be as top  secret as you want and
nobody would ever think of questioning it."

Anthor looked  at the girl strangely,  then at Dr. Darell.  He said, "Let's
go. I have a briefcase I want to pick up in the garden. Wait! Just one last
question. Arcadia, you don't  really have a baseball bat under your bed, do
you?"

"No! I don't."

"Hah. I didn't think so."

Dr. Darell stopped at  the door. "Arcadia," he said, "when you rewrite your
composition  on the  Seldon Plan,  don't be unnecessarily  mysterious about
your  grandmother. There  is  no necessity  to mention  that part  at all."

He and Pelleas descended the stairs in silence. Then the visitor asked in a
strained voice, "Do you mind, sir? How old is she?"

"Fourteen, day before yesterday."

"Fourteen?  Great Galaxy Tell me,  has she ever said  she expects to marry
some day?"

"No, she hasn't. Not to me."

Well, if  she ever does, shoot him. The one she's  going to marry, I mean."
He stared  earnestly into  the older man's  eyes. "I'm serious.  Life could
hold  no greater  horror than  living with  what shell  be like  when she's
twenty. I don't mean to offend you, of course."

"You don't offend me. I think I know what you mean."

Upstairs, the  object of  their tender analyses faced  the Transcriber with
revolted   weariness   and  said,   dully:  "Thefutureofseldonsplan."   The
Transcriber   with  infinite   aplomb,  translated  that   into  elegantly,
complicated script capitals as:

"The Future of Seldon's Plan."

                                     8

                               Seldon's Plan

MATHEMATICS    The  synthesis  of  the   calculus  of  n-variables  and  of
n-dimensional geometry  is the basis of what  Seldon once called "my little
algebra of humanity"....

ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA

Consider a room!

The location  of the  room is not in  question at the moment.  It is merely
sufficient  to  say that  in  that  room, more  than  anywhere, the  Second
Foundation existed.

It  was a room  which, through the  centuries, had  been the abode  of pure
science   yet it had none of the gadgets  with which, through millennia of
association,  science  has  come  to be  considered  equivalent.  It was  a
science, instead, which dealt  with mathematical concepts only, in a manner
similar  to the  speculation of  ancient, ancient  races in  the primitive,
prehistoric days  before technology had  come to be; before  Man had spread
beyond a single, now-unknown world.

For one  thing, there was in  that room  protected  by a mental science as
yet unassailable by the combined physical might of the rest of the Galaxy 
the Prime  Radiant, which  held in its  vitals the Seldon  Plan  complete.

For  another, there  was  a man,  too, in  that room   The  First Speaker.

He was  the twelfth  in the line  of chief guardians  of the  Plan, and his
title bore  no deeper significance than the fact  that at the gatherings of
the leaders of the Second Foundation, he spoke first.

His  predecessor had  beaten the  Mule, but  the wreckage of  that gigantic
struggle still  littered the path  of the Plan For  twenty-five years, he,
and his  administration, had been trying to force  a Galaxy of stubborn and
stupid  human   beings  back  to   the  path  It  was   a  terrible  task.

The  First  Speaker looked  up  at the  opening  door. Even  while, in  the
loneliness of the room,  he considered his quarter century of effort, which
now so slowly and  inevitably approached its climax; even while he had been
so  engaged, his  mind  had been  considering  the newcomer  with a  gentle
expectation.  A  youth,  a  student, one  of  those  who  might take  over,
eventually.

The young man stood  uncertainly at the door, so that the First Speaker had
to walk  to him  and lead him in,  with a friendly hand  upon the shoulder.

The  Student  smiled shyly,  and  the  First Speaker  responded by  saying,
"First, I must tell you why you are here."

They faced each other now, across the desk. Neither was speaking in any way
that  could be  recognized as  such by any  man in  the Galaxy who  was not
himself a member of the Second Foundation.

Speech,  originally, was  the device  whereby Man learned,  imperfectly, to
transmit the  thoughts and  emotions of his  mind. By setting  up arbitrary
sounds and  combinations of sounds to  represent certain mental nuances, be
developed a  method of communication  but one  which in its clumsiness and
thick-thumbed  inadequacy degenerated  all  the delicacy  of the  mind into
gross and guttural signaling.

Down  down  the results  can  be  followed; and  all  the suffering  that
humanity ever knew can be traced to the one fact that no man in the history
of the Galaxy, until Hari Seldon, and very few men thereafter, could really
understand one another. Every human being lived behind an impenetrable wall
of choking  mist within which  no other but he  existed. Occasionally there
were the  dim signals from deep within the cavern  in which another man was
located-so that each might grope toward the other. Yet because they did not
know one another, and could not understand one another, and dared not trust
one  another, and  felt  from infancy  the terrors  and insecurity  of that
ultimate isolation   there was the hunted fear of  man for man, the savage
rapacity of man toward man.

Feet, for tens of thousands of years, had clogged and shuffled in the mud 
and held  down the  minds which, for  an equal time,  had been  fit for the
companionship of the stars.

Grimly,  Man had  instinctively  sought to  circumvent the  prison  bars of
ordinary speech.  Semantics, symbolic logic, psychoanalysis   they had all
been  devices  whereby  speech   could  either  be  refined  or  by-passed.

Psychohistory  had  been  the  development  of mental  science,  the  final
mathematicization thereof, rather, which had finally succeeded. Through the
development of the mathematics  necessary to understand the facts of neural
physiology and the electrochemistry of the nervous system, which themselves
had  to be,  had  to  be, traced  down to  nuclear forces, it  first became
possible  to truly  develop psychology.  And through the  generalization of
psychological  knowledge from  the individual  to the group,  sociology was
also mathematicized.

The larger  groups; the billions that  occupied planets; the trillions that
occupied Sectors; the quadrillions  that occupied the whole Galaxy, became,
not  simply  human  beings, but  gigantic  forces  amenable to  statistical
treatment  so that to Hari Seldon, the future became clear and inevitable,
and the Plan could be set up.

The same  basic developments of  mental science that had  brought about the
development of the Seldon Plan, thus made it also unnecessary for the First
Speaker to use words in addressing the Student.

Every reaction to a  stimulus, however slight, was completely indicative of
all the  trifling changes, of all  the flickering currents that  went on in
another's mind. The First  Speaker could not sense the emotional content of
the Student's instinctively, as the Mule would have been able to do  since
the  Mule was  a mutant with  powers not  ever likely to  become completely
comprehensible to any ordinary  man, even a Second Foundationer  rather he
deduced them, as the result of intensive training.

Since, however, it is inherently impossible in a society based on speech to
indicate truly  the method  of communication of  Second Foundationers among
themselves, the  whole matter will be  hereafter ignored. The First Speaker
will be represented as speaking in ordinary fashion, and if the translation
is not  always entirely  valid, it is  at least the  best that  can be done
under the circumstances.

It will  be pretended therefore, that  the First Speaker  did actually say,
"First, I must  tell you why you are here," instead of  smiling just so and
lifting a finger exactly thus.

The First Speaker said,  "You have studied mental science hard and well for
most of  your life. You have absorbed all your  teachers could give you. It
is time for you and a few others like yourself to begin your apprenticeship
for Speakerhood."

Agitation from the other side of the desk.

"No   now  you  must take  this phlegmatically.  You  had hoped  you would
qualify. You  had feared  you would not.  Actually, both hope  and fear are
weaknesses. You  knew you would qualify and you  hesitate to admit the fact
because  such knowledge might  stamp you  as cocksure and  therefore unfit.
Nonsense! The most hopelessly  stupid man is he who is not aware that he is
wise. It  is part of your  qualification that you  knew you would qualify."

Relaxation on the other side of the desk.

"Exactly. Now  you feel  better and your  guard is down. You  are fitter to
concentrate and  fitter to understand. Remember,  to be truly effective, it
is not necessary to  hold the mind under a tight, controlling barrier which
to the  intelligent probe is  as informative as a  naked mentality. Rather,
one  should   cultivate  an  innocence,  an   awareness  of  self,  and  an
unself-consciousness of  self which leaves one nothing  to hide. My mind is
open to you. Let this be so for both of us."

He went  on. "It is not  an easy thing to  be a Speaker. It  is not an easy
thing to  be a  Psychohistorian in the  first place; and not  even the best
Psychohistorian  need  necessarily qualify  to  be  a Speaker.  There is  a
distinction  here. A  Speaker must  not only  be aware of  the mathematical
intricacies of the Seldon  Plan; he must have a sympathy for it and for its
ends. He must  love the Plan; to him it must  be life and breath. More than
that it must even be as a living friend.

"Do you know what this is?"

The First Speaker's hand hovered gently over the black, shining cube in the
middle of the desk. It was featureless.

"No, Speaker, I do not."

"You have heard of the Prime Radiant?"

"This?" Astonishment.

"You  expected  something  more  noble  and awe-inspiring?  Well,  that  is
natural. It was created in the days of the Empire, by men of Seldon's time.
For nearly  four hundred years, it has  served our needs perfectly, without
requiring  repairs or  adjustment. And  fortunately so,  since none  of the
Second Foundation  is qualified to handle it  in any technical fashion." He
smiled gently.  "Those of the  First Foundation might be  able to duplicate
this, but they must never know, of course."

He depressed a lever  on his side of the desk and the room was in darkness.
But only for a  moment, since with a gradually livening flush, the two long
walls of the room glowed to life. First, a pearly white, unrelieved, then a
trace  of faint  darkness  here and  there,  and finally,  the fine  neatly
printed equations  in black,  with an occasional red  hairline that wavered
through the darker forest like a staggering rillet.

"Come, my boy, step  here before the wall. You will not cast a shadow. This
light does not radiate  from the Radiant in an ordinary manner. To tell you
the  truth, I  do  not know  even faintly  by  what medium  this  effect is
produced, but you will not cast a shadow. I know that."

They stood  together in the light. Each wall was  thirty feet long, and ten
high. The writing was small and covered every inch.

"This is  not the whole Plan," said the First Speaker.  "To get it all upon
both  walls,  the  individual   equations  would  have  to  be  reduced  to
microscopic size   but that is not necessary.  What you now see represents
the main  portions of the Plan till now. You  have learned about this, have
you not?"

"Yes, Speaker, I have."

"Do you recognize any portion."

A slow silence. The  student pointed a finger and as he did so, the line of
equations marched  down the wall,  until the single series  of functions he
had thought of  one could scarcely consider the quick, generalized gesture
of  the  finger to  have  been  sufficiently precise    was at  eye-level.

The First  Speaker laughed softly, "You  will find the Prime  Radiant to be
attuned to your mind. You may expect more surprises from the little gadget.
What  were  you  about   to  say  about  the  equation  you  have  chosen?"

"It,"  faltered the Student,  "is a  Rigellian integral, using  a planetary
distribution  of  a bias  indicating  the  presence of  two chief  economic
classes  on the  planet,  or maybe  a  Sector, plus  an unstable  emotional
pattern."

"And what does it signify?"

"It represents the limit  of tension, since we have here"  he pointed, and
again the equations veered  "a converging series."

"Good,"  said the First  Speaker. "And tell  me, what  do you think  of all
this. A finished work of art, is it not?"

"Definitely!"

"Wrong! It is not."  This, with sharpness. "It is the first lesson you must
unlearn. The  Seldon Plan is  neither complete nor correct.  Instead, it is
merely the best that could be done at the time. Over a dozen generations of
men have  pored over these equations,  worked at them, taken  them apart to
the last decimal place, and put them together again. They've done more than
that.  They've  watched nearly  four  hundred  years pass  and against  the
predictions and equations, they've  checked reality, and they have learned.

"They have learned more  than Seldon ever knew, and if with the accumulated
knowledge of  the centuries  we could repeat  Seldon's work, we  could do a
better job. Is that perfectly clear to you?"

The Student appeared a little shocked.

"Before  you obtain  your Speakerhood,"  continued the First  Speaker, "you
yourself will have to  make an original contribution to the Plan. It is not
such  great  blasphemy.  Every  red  mark  you  see  on  the  wall  is  the
contribution of  a man  among us who  lived since Seldon. Why  ... why" He
looked upward, "There!"

The whole wall seemed to whirl down upon him.

"This," he  said, "is mine." A  fine red line encircled  two forking arrows
and included six square feet of deductions along each path. Between the two
were a series of equations in red.

"It does not," said  the Speaker, "seem to be much. It is at a point in the
Plan  which we  will not reach  yet for a  time as  long as that  which has
already passed. It is  at the period of coalescence, when the Second Empire
that is  to be is in  the grip of rival  personalities who will threaten to
pull it apart  if the fight is too even, or clamp  it into rigidity, if the
fight is too uneven.  Both possibilities are considered here, followed, and
the method of avoiding either indicated.

"Yet it  is all a matter of probabilities and a  third course can exist. It
is one of comparatively  low likelihood  twelve point six four percent, to
be exact  but  even smaller chances have already come to pass and the Plan
is  only  forty percent  complete.  This  third probability  consists of  a
possible compromise  between two  or more of  the conflicting personalities
being considered. This, I showed, would first freeze the Second Empire into
an  unprofitable mold,  and then,  eventually, inflict more  damage through
civil wars than would  have taken place had a compromise never been made in
the first place. Fortunately, that could be prevented, too. And that was my
contribution."

"If I may interrupt, Speaker How is a change made?"

"Through the  agency of  the Radiant. You  will find in your  own case, for
instance,  that  your  mathematics  will  be  checked  rigorously  by  five
different  boards; and  that you will  be required  to defend it  against a
concerted  and  merciless  attack.  Two  years  will then  pass,  and  your
development will  be reviewed again. It has happened  more than once that a
seemingly perfect  piece of work has uncovered  its fallacies only after an
induction  period of  months or  years. Sometimes, the  contributor himself
discovers the flaw.

"If,  after two  years,  another examination,  not less  detailed  than the
first, still  passes it, and   better still  if  in the interim the young
scientist has brought to light additional details, subsidiary evidence, the
contribution will be added  to the Plan. It was the climax of my career; it
will be the climax of yours.

"The Prime  Radiant can be adjusted  to your mind, and  all corrections and
additions  can be  made through  mental rapport.  There will be  nothing to
indicate that  the correction or addition  is yours. In all  the history of
the Plan there has  been no personalization. It is rather a creation of all
of us together. Do you understand?"

"Yes, Speaker!"

"Then, enough  of that." A stride to the Prime  Radiant, and the walls were
blank  again save  for the  ordinary room-lighting  region along  the upper
borders. "Sit  down here at my  desk, and let me talk  to you. It is enough
for  a  Psychohistorian,  as  such,  to  know  his  Biostatistics  and  his
Neurochemical Electromathematics.  Some know nothing else  and are fit only
to be  statistical technicians. But a  Speaker must be able  to discuss the
Plan without  mathematics. If not the Plan  itself, at least its philosophy
and its aims.

"First of  all, what  is the aim  of the Plan?  Please tell me  in your own
words   and don't grope for fine sentiment. You  won't be judged on polish
and suavity, I assure you."

It  was  the Student's  first  chance at  more  than a  bisyllable, and  he
hesitated before plunging into the expectant space cleared away for him. He
said, diffidently:  "As a result of what I have  learned, I believe that it
is the intention of  the Plan to establish a human civilization based on an
orientation entirely  different from anything that  ever before existed. An
orientation which, according to  the findings of Psychohistory, could never
spontaneously come into being"

"Stop!" The First Speaker was insistent. 'You must not say 'never.' That is
a lazy  slurring over  of the facts. Actually,  Psychohistory predicts only
probabilities. A particular event  may be infinitesimally probable, but the
probability is always greater than zero."

"Yes, Speaker.  The orientation desired, if I  may correct myself, then, is
well known to possess no significant probability of spontaneously coming to
pass."

"Better. What is the orientation?"

"It is  that of  a civilization based  on mental science. In  all the known
history  of  Mankind,  advances   have  been  made  primarily  in  physical
technology;  in the  capacity of  handling the  inanimate world  about Man.
Control  of self  and  society has  been left  to  chance or  to  the vague
gropings of intuitive ethical  systems based on inspiration and emotion. As
a result, no culture of greater stability than about fifty-five percent has
ever  existed,  and  these  only as  the  result  of  great human  misery."

"And  why   is  the   orientation  we  speak  of   a  nonspontaneous  one?"

"Because a  large minority  of human beings  are mentally equipped  to take
part  in the  advance of physical  science, and  all receive the  crude and
visible  benefits thereof.  Only  an insignificant  minority, however,  are
inherently  able to  lead Man  through the  greater involvements  of Mental
Science; and the benefits derived therefrom, while longer lasting, are more
subtle and less apparent. Furthermore, since such an orientation would lead
to  the development  of a  benevolent dictatorship  of the mentally  best 
virtually a higher subdivision  of Man  it would be resented and could not
be stable  without the application of a force  which would depress the rest
of Mankind  to brute level. Such a development is  repugnant to us and must
be avoided."

"What, then, is the solution?"

"The solution  is the Seldon Plan. Conditions have  been so arranged and so
maintained that  in a  millennium from its  beginnings  six  hundred years
from  now, a  Second Galactic  Empire will  have been established  in which
Mankind will  be ready for the  leadership of Mental Science.  In that same
interval, the Second Foundation in its development, will have brought forth
a group  of Psychologists ready to assume leadership.  Or, as I have myself
often thought,  the First  Foundation supplies the physical  framework of a
single  political  unit,  and the  Second  Foundation  supplies the  mental
framework of a ready-made ruling class."

"I  see. Fairly  adequate. Do  you think that  any  Second Empire,  even if
formed in  the time set by Seldon, would do as  a fulfillment of his Plan?"

"No, Speaker, I do  not. There are several possible Second Empires that may
be formed  in the period of time stretching  from nine hundred to seventeen
hundred years after the inception of the Plan, but only one of these is the
Second Empire."

"And in  view of  all this, why is  it necessary that the  existence of the
Second  Foundation  be hidden    above  all, from  the First  Foundation?"

The Student probed for  a hidden meaning to the question and failed to find
it. He was troubled in his answer, "For the same reason that the details of
the Plan  as a  whole must be hidden  from Mankind in general.  The laws of
Psychohistory  are statistical in  nature and  are rendered invalid  if the
actions of  individual men are not random in nature.  If a sizable group of
human beings  learned of  key details of  the Plan, their  actions would be
governed by that knowledge  and would no longer be random in the meaning of
the  axioms of  Psychohistory.  In other  words,  they would  no longer  be
perfectly predictable. Your pardon,  Speaker, but I feel that the answer is
not satisfactory."

"It is well that  you do. Your answer is quite incomplete. It is the Second
Foundation itself  which must  be hidden, not  simply the Plan.  The Second
Empire  is not yet  formed. We have  still a  society which would  resent a
ruling  class of psychologists,  and which  would fear its  development and
fight against it. Do you understand that?"

"Yes, Speaker, I do. The point has never been stressed"

"Don't  minimize. It  has never been  made   in the classroom,  though you
should be  capable of deducing it  yourself. This and many  other points we
will make  now and in the near future  during your apprenticeship. You will
see me  again in a week.  By that time, I would  like to have comments from
you  as to  a certain  problem which  I now  set before  you. I  don't want
complete and rigorous mathematical treatment. That would take a year for an
expert, and  not a week for  you. But I do want  an indication as to trends
and directions

"You have  here a  fork in the  Plan at a  period in  time of about  half a
century ago.  The necessary  details are included.  You will note  that the
path  followed  by  the  assumed  reality  diverges from  all  the  plotted
predictions; its probability being under one percent. You will estimate for
how  long  the divergence  may  continue before  it becomes  uncorrectable.
Estimate also  the probable end if uncorrected,  and a reasonable method of
correction."

The Student flipped the Viewer at random and looked stonily at the passages
presented on the tiny, built-in screen.

He  said:   "Why  this  particular  problem,   Speaker?  It  obviously  has
significance other than purely academic."

"Thank you, my boy.  You are as quick as I had expected. The problem is not
supposititious.  Nearly half a  century ago,  the Mule burst  into Galactic
history and  for ten years was the largest single  fact in the universe. He
was unprovided  for; uncalculated for. He bent  the Plan seriously, but not
fatally.

"To stop  him before he  did become fatal, however,  we were forced to take
active part against him. We revealed our existence, and infinitely worse, a
portion of  our power.  The First Foundation  has learned of  us, and their
actions  are  now predicated  on  that  knowledge. Observe  in the  problem
presented. Here. And here.

"Naturally, you will not speak of this to anyone."

There was  an appalled  pause, as realization  seeped into the  Student. He
said: "Then the Seldon Plan has failed!"

"Not yet. It merely may have failed. The probabilities of success are still
twenty-one   point   four   percent,    as   of   the   last   assessment."

                                     9

                              The Conspirators

For  Dr.  Darell  and  Pelleas  Anthor,  the evenings  passed  in  friendly
intercourse;  the days  in  pleasant unimportance.  It might  have  been an
ordinary visit. Dr. Darell introduced the young man as a cousin from across
space, and interest was dulled by the clich.

Somehow, however,  among the small  talk, a name might  be mentioned. There
would be  an easy thoughtfulness. Dr.  Darell might say, "No,"  or he might
say, "Yes."  A call  on the open  Communi-wave issued a  casual invitation,
"Want you to meet my cousin."

And  Arcadia's preparations  proceeded in  their own  manner. In  fact, her
actions   might   be  considered   the   least   straightforward  of   all.

For  instance,  she induced  Olynthus  Dam at  school  to donate  to her  a
home-built,  self-contained  sound-receiver by  methods  which indicated  a
future for  her that promised peril  to all males with  whom she might come
into contact.  To avoid details,  she merely exhibited such  an interest in
Olynthus' self-publicized hobby  he had a home workshop-combined with such
a well-modulated transfer of this interest to Olynthus' own pudgy features,
that  the unfortunate  youth  found himself:  1) discoursing  at  great and
animated  length upon the  principles of  the hyperwave motor;  2) becoming
dizzyingly aware  of the great,  absorbed eyes that rested  so lightly upon
his; and  3) forcing into her willing hands  his own greatest creation, the
aforesaid sound-receiver.

Arcadia cultivated Olynthus in  diminishing degree thereafter for just long
enough to  remove all suspicion that the  sound-receiver had been the cause
of the friendship. For  months afterwards, Olynthus felt the memory of that
short period in his life over and over again with the tendrils of his mind,
until finally,  for lack  of further addition,  he gave up and  let it slip
away.

When the  seventh evening came, and five men sat  in the Darell living room
with food within and  tobacco without, Arcadia's desk upstairs was occupied
by   this  quite   unrecognizable  home-product  of   Olynthus'  ingenuity.

Five  men then.  Dr. Darell,  of course,  with graying hair  and meticulous
clothing, looking somewhat older  than his forty-two years. Pelleas Author,
serious and  quick-eyed at the moment looking  young and unsure of himself.
And the three new men: Jole Turbor, visicastor, bulky and plump-lipped; Dr.
Elvett Semic, professor-emeritus of  physics at the University, scrawny and
wrinkled, his  clothes only  half-filled; Homir Munn,  librarian, lanky and
terribly ill-at-ease.

Dr. Darell spoke easily,  in a normal, matter-of-fact tone: "This gathering
has been arranged, gentlemen, for a trifle more than merely social reasons.
You may have guessed  this. Since you have been deliberately chosen because
of  your backgrounds,  you  may also  guess  the danger  involved. I  won't
minimize it,  but I  will point out that  we are all condemned  men, in any
case.

"You will  notice that  none of you  have been invited with  any attempt at
secrecy. None  of you have been asked to come  here unseen. The windows are
not adjusted  to non-insight. No screen  of any sort is  about the room. We
have only to attract  the attention of the enemy to be ruined; and the best
way to attract that  attention is to assume a false and theatrical secrecy.

(Hah, thought Arcadia,  bending over the voices coming  a bit screechily 
out of the little box.)

"Do you understand that?"

Elvett Semic  twitched his  lower lip and  bared his teeth  in the screwup,
wrinkled gesture  that preceded  his every sentence.  "Oh, get on  with it.
Tell us about the youngster."

Dr. Darell  said, "Pelleas Anthor is  his name. He was  a student of my old
colleague, Kleise, who died  last year. Kleise sent me his brain-pattern to
the  fifth sublevel,  before he  died, which  pattern has been  now checked
against  that  of  the  man  before  you.  You  know,  of  course,  that  a
brain-pattern cannot be duplicated  that far, even by men of the Science of
Psychology. If  you don't know that,  you'll have to take  my word for it."

Turbor said,  purse-lipped, "We might as  well make a beginning somewheres.
We'll  take  your  word  for  it,  especially  since  you're  the  greatest
electroneurologist in the Galaxy now that Kleise is dead. At least, that is
the way  I've described you in  my visicast comment, and  I even believe it
myself. How old are you, Anthor?"

"Twenty-nine, Mr. Turbor."

"Hm-m-m.   And  are   you  an   electroneurologist,  too?  A   great  one?"

"Just a  student of the science. But I work hard,  and I've had the benefit
of Kleise's training."

Munn broke in. He had a slight stammer at periods of tension. "I ... I wish
you'd  g ...  get  started. I  think everyone's  t  ... talking  too much."

Dr. Darell lifted an eyebrow in Munn's direction. you're right, Homir. Take
over, Pelleas."

"Not for a while,"  said Pelleas Anthor, slowly, "because before we can get
started   although  I  appreciate Mr.  Munn's sentiment   I  must request
brain-wave data."

Darell frowned.  "What is this,  Anthor? What brain-wave data  do you refer
to?"

"The patterns  of all of you. You have taken mine,  Dr. Darell. I must take
yours  and those  of  the rest  of you.  And I  must take  the measurements
myself."

Turbor said, "There's no  reason for him to trust us, Darell. The young man
is within his rights."

"Thank you," said Anthor.  "If youll lead the way to your laboratory then,
Dr. Darell, well proceed.  I took the liberty this morning of checking your
apparatus."

The science  of electroencephalography was at once new  and old. It was old
in the  sense that  the knowledge of  the microcurrents generated  by nerve
cells of living beings belonged to that immense category of human knowledge
whose origin  was completely lost  It was knowledge that  stretched back as
far as the earliest remnants of human history

And  yet  it was  new,  too. The  fact  of the  existence of  microcurrents
slumbered through the tens  of thousands of years of Galactic Empire as one
of those vivid and  whimsical, but quite useless, items of human knowledge.
Some  had  attempted  to  form classifications  of  waves  into waking  and
sleeping,  calm  and  excited,  well  and  ill    but  even  the  broadest
conceptions    had   had    their    hordes   of    vitiating   exceptions.

Others had  tried to show the existence  of brain-wave groups, analogous to
the well-known blood groups,  and to show that external environment was the
defining  factor. These were  the race-minded  people who claimed  that Man
could  be divided  into  subspecies. But  such a  philosophy could  make no
headway against  the overwhelming ecumenical drive  involved in the fact of
Galactic  Empire    one political  unit  covering  twenty million  stellar
systems, involving  all of  Man from the  central world of Trantor   now a
gorgeous  and  impossible memory  of  the  great past    to the  loneliest
asteroid on the periphery.

And then  again, in a society given over, as that  of the First Empire was,
to the  physical sciences and  inanimate technology, there was  a vague but
mighty  sociological  push away  from the  study of  the mind. It  was less
respectable  because less  immediately useful;  and it was  poorly financed
since it was less profitable.

After the disintegration of  the First Empire, there came the fragmentation
of organized  science, back,  back  past  even the fundamentals  of atomic
power into  the chemical power of coal and oil.  The one exception to this,
of course, was the First Foundation where the spark of science, revitalized
and grown more intense  was maintained and fed to flame. Yet there, too, it
was  the  physical that  ruled,  and  the brain,  except  for surgery,  was
neglected ground.

Hari Seldon was the first to express what afterwards came to be accepted as
truth.

"Neural microcurrents," he once said, "carry within them the spark of every
varying impulse  and response,  conscious and unconscious.  The brain-waves
recorded on  neatly squared  paper in trembling  peaks and troughs  are the
mirrors of the combined thought-pulses of billions of cells. Theoretically,
analysis should  reveal the  thoughts and emotions  of the subject,  to the
last and  least. Differences  should be detected  that are due  not only to
gross physical defects, inherited  or acquired, but also to shifting states
of  emotion, to advancing  education and  experience, even to  something as
subtle as a change in the subject's philosophy of life."

But   even   Seldon   could   approach   no   further   than   speculation.

And now  for fifty years, the men of the  First Foundation had been tearing
at that  incredibly vast  and complicated storehouse of  new knowledge. The
approach, naturally, was made through new techniques  as, for example, the
use of electrodes at skull sutures by a newly-developed means which enabled
contact to be made directly with the gray cells, without even the necessity
of shaving  a patch of skull.  And then there was  a recording device which
automatically  recorded the  brain-wave data  as an  overall total,  and as
separate functions of six independent variables.

What  was  most significant,  perhaps,  was  the growing  respect in  which
encephalography and the encephalographer  was held. Kleise, the greatest of
them, sat  at scientific conventions on an  equal basis with the physicist.
Dr.  Darell, though  no longer  active in  the science,  was known  for his
brilliant advances  in encephalographic analysis almost  as much as for the
fact that  he was  the son of Bayta  Darell, the great heroine  of the past
generation.

And so now, Dr. Darell sat in his own chair, with the delicate touch of the
feathery electrodes scarcely hinting  at pressure upon his skull, while the
vacuum-incased needles  wavered to and fro. His back  was to the recorder 
otherwise, as  was well  known, the sight  of the moving  curves induced an
unconscious effort  to control them, with noticeable  results  but he knew
that   the  central   dial  was   expressing  the  strongly   rhythmic  and
little-varying Sigma  curve, which was  to be expected of  his own powerful
and  disciplined  mind.  It  would  be  strengthened and  purified  in  the
subsidiary dial dealing with the Cerebellar wave. There would be the sharp,
near-discontinuous leaps  from the frontal lobe,  and the subdued shakiness
from  the  subsurface  regions   with  its  narrow  range  of  frequencies

He knew  his own  brain-wave pattern much  as an artist  might be perfectly
aware of the color of his eyes.

Pelleas Anthor  made no comment when Darell  rose from the reclining chair.
The young  man abstracted  the seven recordings,  glanced at them  with the
quick,  all-embracing eyes  of  one who  knows exactly  what tiny  facet of
near-nothingness is being looked for.

"If you don't mind, Dr. Semic."

Semic's age-yellowed face was serious. Electroencephalography was a science
of  his  old age  of  which  he knew  little;  an upstart  that he  faintly
resented. He knew that  he was old and that his wave-pattern would show it.
The wrinkles  on his face showed it, the stoop in  his walk, the shaking of
his hand   but they spoke only of his  body. The brain-wave patterns might
show that  his mind was old, too.  An embarrassing and unwarranted invasion
of a man's last protecting stronghold, his own mind.

The electrodes  were adjusted.  The process did  not hurt, of  course, from
beginning to end. There  was just that tiny tingle, far below the threshold
of sensation.

And then came Turbor, who sat quietly and unemotionally through the fifteen
minute process,  and Munn, who jerked at the  first touch of the electrodes
and then  spent the session rolling  his eyes as though  he wished he could
turn   them  backwards   and  watch   through  a   hole  in   his  occiput.

"And now" said Darell, when all was done.

"And now,"  said Anthor, apologetically,  "there is one more  person in the
house."

Darell, frowning, said: "My daughter?"

'Yes.  I  suggested  that  she  stay  home tonight,  if  you'll  remember."

"For    encephalographical   analysis?    What   in   the    Galaxy   for?"

"I cannot proceed without it."

Darell  shrugged and  climbed the  stairs. Arcadia,  amply warned,  had the
sound-receiver  off  when he  entered;  then  followed him  down with  mild
obedience. It was the first time in her life  except for the taking of her
basic  mind  pattern  as an  infant,  for  identification and  registration
purposes  that she found herself under the electrodes.

"May  I  see,"  she  asked,  when  it  was  over,  holding  out  her  hand.

Dr. Darell said, "You  would not understand, Arcadia. Isn't it time for you
to go to bed?"

"Yes, father," she said, demurely. "Good night, all."

She  ran  up the  stairs  and  plumped into  bed  with a  minimum of  basic
preparation. With  Olynthus' sound-receiver propped beside  her pillow, she
felt like  a character  out of a  book-film, and hugged every  moment of it
close to her chest in an ecstasy of "Spy-stuff."

The  first words  she  heard were  Anthor's and  they were:  "The analyses,
gentlemen, are all satisfactory. The child's as well."

Child,  she thought disgustedly,  and bristled  at Anthor in  the darkness.

Anthor had  opened his briefcase now, and out of  it, he took several dozen
brain-wave  records. They were  not originals.  Nor had the  briefcase been
fitted with an ordinary  lock. Had the key been held in any hand other than
his own, the contents thereof would have silently and instantly oxidized to
an indecipherable ash. Once  removed from the briefcase, the records did so
anyway after half an hour.

But during their short  lifetime, Anthor spoke quickly. "I have the records
here  of  several  minor  government  officials  at  Anacreon.  This  is  a
psychologist at  Locris University;  this an industrialist  at Siwenna. The
rest are as you see."

They  crowded closely.  To all  but Darell,  they were  so many  quivers on
parchment.   To   Darell,   they    shouted   with   a   million   tongues.

Anthor pointed lightly, "I  call your attention, Dr. Darell, to the plateau
region among the secondary  Tauian waves in the frontal lobe, which is what
all these records have in common. Would you use my Analytical Rule, sir, to
check my statement?"

The  Analytical  Rule  might  be  considered  a  distant relation    as  a
skyscraper is to a  shack  of that kindergarten toy, the logarithmic Slide
Rule. Darell used it  with the wristflip of long practice. He made freehand
drawings  of  the result  and,  as  Anthor stated,  there were  featureless
plateaus  in frontal  lobe  regions where  strong swings  should  have been
expected.

"How   would    you   interpret   that,   Dr.    Darell?"   asked   Anthor.

"I'm not  sure. Offhand,  I don't see  how it's possible. Even  in cases of
amnesia,  there is  suppression,  but not  removal. Drastic  brain surgery,
perhaps?"

"Oh, something's been cut out," cried Anthor, impatiently, "yes! Not in the
physical sense,  however. You know, the Mule could  have done just that. He
could  have suppressed  completely all  capacity for  a certain  emotion or
attitude of  mind, and  leave nothing but  just such a  flatness. Or else"

"Or  else the  Second Foundation  could have  done it.  Is that  it?" asked
Turbor, with a slow smile.

There  was no  real  need to  answer that  thoroughly  rhetorical question.

"What made you suspicious, Mr. Anthor?" asked Munn.

"It wasn't  I. It was Dr. Kleise. He  collected brain-wave patterns much as
the  Planetary Police  do,  but along  different lines.  He  specialized in
intellectuals,  government officials  and business  leaders. You  see, it's
quite  obvious that if  the Second  Foundation is directing  the historical
course  of the  Galaxy   of us   that they  must do  it subtly and  in as
minimal a fashion as possible. If they work through minds, as they must, it
is  the  minds  of  people  with influence;  culturally,  industrially,  or
politically. And with those he concerned himself."

"Yes," objected Munn, "but  is there corroboration? How do these people act
  I mean  the ones  with the  plateau. Maybe  it's all a  perfectly normal
phenomenon."  He  looked hopelessly  at  the  others out  of his,  somehow,
childlike blue eyes, but met no encouraging return.

"I leave  that to  Dr. Darell," said  Anthor. "Ask him how  many times he's
seen this  phenomenon in his general  studies, or in reported  cases in the
literature over  the past generation. Then ask him  the chances of it being
discovered in  almost one out of every  thousand cases among the categories
Dr. Kleise studied."

"I suppose that there  is no doubt," said Darell, thoughtfully, "that these
are artificial mentalities. They  have been tampered with. In a way, I have
suspected this"

"I know  that, Dr. Darell," said Author. "I also  know you once worked with
Dr. Kleise. I would like to know why you stopped."

There wasn't actually hostility  in his question. Perhaps nothing more than
caution; but, at any  rate, it resulted in a long pause. Darell looked from
one to  another of his guests,  then said brusquely, "Because  there was no
point to Kleise's battle. He was competing with an adversary too strong for
him. He was detecting  what we  he and I  knew  he would detect  that we
were not our own masters. And I didn't want to know! I had my self-respect.
I liked  to think that our  Foundation was captain of  its collective soul;
that our  forefathers had not quite fought and  died for nothing. I thought
it would  be most simple to  turn my face away  as long as I  was not quite
sure. I didn't need  my position since the Government pension awarded to my
mother's family in perpetuity would take care of my uncomplicated needs. My
home laboratory would suffice to keep boredom away, and life would some day
end Then Kleise died"

Semic showed his teeth and said: "This fellow Kleise; I don't know him. How
did he die?"

Anthor cut in: "He died. He thought he would. He told me half a year before
that he was getting too close--"

"Now  we're too c ... close, too,  aren't we?" suggested Munn, dry-mouthed,
as his Adam's apple jiggled.

"Yes,"  said Anthor, flatly,  "but we were,  anyway   all of us.  It's why
you've all been chosen. I'm Kleise's student. Dr. Darell was his colleague.
Jole Turbor  has been denouncing our blind faith in  the saving hand of the
Second Foundation  on the air, until the government  shut him off  through
the agency, I might mention, of a powerful financier whose brain shows what
Kleise used  to call  the Tamper Plateau.  Homir Munn has  the largest home
collection of  Muliana  if I may use the  phrase to signify collected data
concerning  the  Mule    in  existence,  and  has  published  some  papers
containing speculation on the nature and function of the Second Foundation.
Dr.  Semic  has  contributed  as  much  as  anyone to  the  mathematics  of
encephalographic  analysis, though  I  don't believe  he realized  that his
mathematics could be so applied."

Semic opened his eyes wide and chuckled gaspingly, "No, young fellow. I was
analyzing intranuclear motions   the n-body problem, you know. I'm lost in
encephalography."

"Then we  know where  we stand. The  government can, of  course, do nothing
about  the matter.  Whether the  mayor or  anyone in his  administration is
aware of the seriousness of the situation, I don't know. But this I do know
 we five have  nothing to lose and stand to gain much. With every increase
in our  knowledge, we can widen ourselves in safe  directions. We are but a
beginning, you understand."

"How widespread," put in  Turbor, "is this Second Foundation infiltration?"

"I  don't  know. There's  a  flat  answer. All  the  infiltrations we  have
discovered were  on the outer fringes of the  nation. The capital world may
yet  be clean,  though even  that is not  certain   else I would  not have
tested  you.  You  were  particularly  suspicious, Dr.  Darell,  since  you
abandoned  research with  Kleise.  Kleise never  forgave you,  you  know. I
thought that  perhaps the  Second Foundation had corrupted  you, but Kleise
always insisted that you were a coward. You'll forgive me, Dr. Darell, if I
explain  this  to  make  my own  position  clear.  I,  personally, think  I
understand your attitude, and,  if it was cowardice, I consider it venial."

Darell drew a breath before replying. "I ran away! Call it what you wish. I
tried to maintain our friendship, however, yet he never wrote nor called me
until the day he  sent me your brainwave data, and that was scarcely a week
before he died"

"If  you don't  mind,"  interrupted Homir  Munn,  with a  flash of  nervous
eloquence, "I  d ... don't see  what you think you're  doing. We're a p ...
poor bunch of conspirators,  if we're just going to talk and talk and t ...
talk.  And I  don't see what  else we can  do, anyway.  This is v  ... very
childish. B ... brain-waves and mumbo jumbo and all that. Is there just one
thing you intend to do?"

Pelleas Author's eyes were bright, "Yes, there is. We need more information
on  the Second  Foundation. It's  the prime  necessity. The Mule  spent the
first five years of  his rule in just that quest for information and failed
 or so we  have all been led to believe. But then he stopped looking. Why?
Because he failed? Or because he succeeded?"

"M  ...  more talk,"  said  Munn,  bitterly. "How  are  we  ever to  know?"

"If you'll  listen to me The Mule's capital was  on Kalgan. Kalgan was not
part of the Foundation's commercial sphere of influence before the Mule and
it  is not  part of it  now. Kalgan is  ruled, at  the moment, by  the man,
Stettin,  unless there's  another  palace revolution  by tomorrow.  Stettin
calls  himself First  Citizen and  considers himself  the successor  of the
Mule.  If  there  is  any  tradition  in  that  world, it  rests  with  the
super-humanity and greatness of the Mule  a tradition almost superstitious
in intensity. As a result, the Mule's old palace is maintained as a shrine.
No unauthorized  person may  enter; nothing within has  ever been touched."

"Well?"

"Well,  why is  that so?  At times  like these,  nothing happens  without a
reason. What  if it is not  superstition only that makes  the Mule's palace
inviolate? What if the  Second Foundation has so arranged matters? In short
what  if   the  results  of  the   Mule's  five-year  search  are  within"

"Oh, p ... poppycock."

"Why not?"  demanded Anthor. "Throughout its  history the Second Foundation
has  hidden itself and  interfered in  Galactic affairs in  minimal fashion
only. I  know that to us  it would seem more  logical to destroy the Palace
or, at the least,  to remove the data. But you must consider the psychology
of these  master psychologists. They  are Seldons; they are  Mules and they
work by  indirection, through the mind. They  would never destroy or remove
when  they could  achieve  their ends  by creating  a  state of  mind. Eh?"

No immediate answer, and Anthor continued, "And you, Munn, are just the one
to get the information we need."

"I?" It  was an astounded yell. Munn looked from  one to the other rapidly,
"I can't  do such a thing.  I'm no man of action;  no hero of any teleview.
I'm a librarian.  If I can help you that way, all  right, and I'll risk the
Second Foundation, but I'm  not going out into space on any qu ... quixotic
thing like that."

"Now, look,"  said Anthor,  patiently, "Dr. Darell  and I have  both agreed
that you're the man. It's the only way to do it naturally. You say you're a
librarian. Fine! What is  your main field of interest? Muliana! You already
have the  greatest collection of material on the Mule  in the Galaxy. It is
natural for  you to want more;  more natural for you  than for anyone else.
You could request entrance  to the Kalgan Palace without arousing suspicion
of ulterior  motives. You might be refused but  you would not be suspected.
What's  more, you  have  a one-man  cruiser. You're  known to  have visited
foreign  planets during your  annual vacation.  You've even been  on Kalgan
before. Don't  you understand that you  need only act as  you always have?"

"But  I can't  just say, 'W  ... won't you  kindly let  me in to  your most
sacred shrine, M ... Mr. First Citizen?"

"Why not?"

"Because, by the Galaxy, he won't let me!"

"All  right, then. So  he won't Then  you'll come  home and well  think of
something else."

Munn looked about in  helpless rebellion. He felt himself being talked into
something  he  hated.  No  one  offered  to  help  him  extricate  himself.

So in the end  two decisions were made in Dr. Darell's house. The first was
a reluctant one of  agreement on the part of Munn to take off into space as
soon as his summer vacation began.

The other  was a highly unauthorized  decision on the part  of a thoroughly
unofficial   member  of  the   gathering,  made   as  she  clicked   off  a
sound-receiver  and  composed  herself for  a  belated  sleep. This  second
decision does not concern us just yet.

                                     10

                             Approaching Crisis

A  week had  passed on  the Second  Foundation, and  the First  Speaker was
smiling once again upon the Student.

"You  must have  brought me  interesting results,  or you  would not  be so
filled with anger."

The Student put his hand upon the sheaf of calculating paper he had brought
with  him and  said,  "Are you  sure that  the problem  is a  factual one?"

"The premises are true. I have distorted nothing."

"Then I must accept the results, and I do not want to."

"Naturally.  But what have  your wants to  do with  it? Well, tell  me what
disturbs you  so. No, no, put your derivations to  one side. I will subject
them  to analysis  afterward.  Meanwhile,  talk to  me.  Let me  judge your
understanding."

"Well, then, Speaker It  becomes very apparent that a gross overall change
in the basic psychology of the First Foundation has taken place. As long as
they knew  of the  existence of a  Seldon Plan, without knowing  any of the
details thereof,  they were  confident but uncertain. They  knew they would
succeed,  but  they  didn't  know when  or  how.  There  was, therefore,  a
continuous  atmosphere  of  tension  and strain    which  was what  Seldon
desired. The  First Foundation,  in other words,  could be counted  upon to
work at maximum potential."

"A  doubtful metaphor,"  said the  First Speaker,  "but I  understand you."

"But now,  Speaker, they  know of the  existence of a  Second Foundation in
what  amounts  to  detail,  rather merely  than  as  an  ancient and  vague
statement  of Seldon's.  They have  an inkling  as to  its function  as the
guardian of  the Plan. They know that an  agency exists which watches their
every step  and will  not let them  fall. So they  abandon their purposeful
stride and allow themselves  to be carried upon a litter. Another metaphor,
I'm afraid."

"Nevertheless, go on."

"And that very abandonment of effort; that growing inertia; that lapse into
softness and into a  decadent and hedonistic culture, means the ruin of the
Plan. They must be self-propelled."

"Is that all?"

"No,  there is  more. The majority  reaction is  as described. But  a great
probability exists  for a minority reaction.  Knowledge of our guardianship
and our  control will  rouse among a  few, not complacence,  but hostility.
This follows from Korillov's Theorem"

"Yes, yes. I know the theorem."

"I'm sorry, Speaker. It is difficult to avoid mathematics. In any case, the
effect is that not  only is the Foundation's effort diluted, but part of it
is turned against us, actively against us."

"And is that all?"

"There  remains one  other factor  of which  the probability  is moderately
low---"

"Very good. What is that?"

"While the  energies of the First Foundation  were directed only to Empire;
while their  only enemies were  huge and outmoded hulks  that remained from
the  shambles of  the  past, they  were obviously  concerned only  with the
physical sciences. With us  forming a new, large part of their environment,
a  change in  view may  well be  imposed on  them. They  may try  to become
psychologists"

"That change,"  said the First Speaker, coolly,  "has already taken place."

The Student's  lips compressed  themselves into a  pale line. "Then  all is
over. It is the  basic incompatibility with the Plan. Speaker, would I have
known of this if I had lived  outside?"

The  First Speaker  spoke seriously,  "You feel  humiliated, my  young man,
because, thinking  you understood so  much so well, you  suddenly find that
many very apparent things were unknown to you. Thinking you were one of the
Lords of the Galaxy;  you suddenly find that you stand near to destruction.
Naturally,  you  will  resent  the ivory  tower  in  which  you lived;  the
seclusion  in which  you  were educated;  the  theories on  which you  were
reared.

"I once  had that feeling. It is normal. Yet it  was necessary that in your
formative years you have no direct contact with the Galaxy, that you remain
here,  where  all knowledge  is filtered  to you,  and your  mind carefully
sharpened. We  could have shown you this ...  this part-failure of the Plan
earlier and spared you the shock now, but you would not have understood the
significance properly, as you now will. Then you find no solution at all to
the problem?"

The Student shook his head and said hopelessly, "None!"

"Well, it  is not surprising. Listen  to me, young man.  A course of action
exists and  has been followed for over a decade. It  is not a usual course,
but one  that we  have been forced  into against our will.  It involves low
probabilities, dangerous assumptions We have even been forced to deal with
individual reactions at times,  because that was the only possible way, and
you  know that  Psychostatistics  by its  very nature  has no  meaning when
applied to less than planetary numbers."

"Are we succeeding?" gasped the Student.

"There's no way of  telling yet. We have kept the situation stable so far 
but for the  first time in the history of the Plan,  it is possible for the
unexpected actions of a single individual to destroy it. We have adjusted a
minimum number of outsiders  to a needful state of mind; we have our agents
  but their  paths are planned.  They dare  not improvise. That  should be
obvious to  you. And I will  not conceal the worst   if we are discovered,
here, on  this world, it will  not only be the  Plan that is destroyed, but
ourselves, our physical selves. So you see, our solution is not very good."

"But the  little you have described does not sound  like a solution at all,
but like a desperate guess."

"No. Let us say, an intelligent guess."

"When is  the crisis, Speaker? When will we  know whether we have succeeded
or not?"

"Well within the year, no doubt."

The Student considered that,  then nodded his head. He shook hands with the
Speaker. "Well, it's good to know."

He turned on his heel and left.

The first  Speaker looked  out silently as the  window gained transparency.
Past the giant structures to the quite, crowding stars.

A year would pass  quickly. Would any of them, any of Seldon's heritage, be
alive at its end?

                                     11

                                  Stowaway

It  was a  little over  a month  before the  summer could  be said  to have
started. Started,  that is, to the  extent that Homir Munn  had written his
final financial  report of the fiscal year, seen  to it that the substitute
librarian  supplied  by  the  Government  was  sufficiently  aware  of  the
subtleties of  the post  last  year's man had been  quite unsatisfactory 
and arranged to have  his little cruiser the Unimara  named after a tender
and  mysterious episode  of twenty  years past   taken  out of  its winter
cobwebbery.

He left Terminus  in a sullen distemper. No one was at  the port to see him
off. That would not have been natural since no one ever had in the past. He
knew very well that  it was important to have this trip in no way different
from  any  he had  made  in  the past,  yet  he  felt drenched  in a  vague
resentment. He,  Homir Munn, was  risking his neck in  derring-doery of the
most outrageous sort, and yet he left alone.

At least, so he thought.

And it  was because he thought  wrongly, that the following  day was one of
confusion,  both  on  the  Unimara   and  in  Dr.  Darell's suburban  home.

It hit  Dr. Darell's  home first, in  point of time, through  the medium of
Poli, the  maid, whose month's vacation was now quite  a thing of the past.
She flew down the stairs in a flurry and stutter.

The good doctor met  her and she tried vainly to put emotion into words but
ended  by  thrusting  a  sheet  of  paper  and  a cubical  object  at  him.

He took them unwillingly and said: "What's wrong, Poli?"

"She's gone, doctor."

"Who's gone?"

"Arcadia!"

"What  do  you  mean,  gone?  Gone  where?  What are  you  talking  about?"

And she stamped her foot: 'I don't know. She's gone, and there's a suitcase
and some clothes gone  with her and there's that letter. Why don't you read
it, instead of just standing there? Oh, you men!"

Dr. Darell  shrugged and opened the envelope. The  letter was not long, and
except for  the angular signature, "Arkady," was  in the ornate and flowing
handwriting of Arcadia's transcriber.

     Dear Father:

     It would have been simply too heartbreaking to say good-by to you
     in person.  I might have cried  like a little girl  and you would
     have been ashamed of  me. So I'm writing a letter instead to tell
     you how  much III miss you, even  while I'm having this perfectly
     wonderful summer vacation with Uncle Homir. III take good care of
     myself and it won't be long before Im home again. Meanwhile, I'm
     leaving you  something that's  all my own.  You can have  it now.

     Your loving daughter,

     Arkady.

He read it through  several times with an expression that grew blanker each
time. He said stiffly, "Have you read this, Poli?"

Poli was instantly on the defensive. "I certainly can't be blamed for that,
doctor. The envelope has 'Poli' written on the outside, and I had no way of
telling there was a letter for you on the inside. I'm no snoop, doctor, and
in the years I've been with"

Darell held  up a placating hand,  "Very well, Poli. It's  not important. I
just   wanted   to   make  sure   you   understood   what  had   happened."

He was considering rapidly. It was no use telling her to forget the matter.
With regard to the  enemy, "forget" was a meaningless word; and the advice,
insofar as  it made the matter  more important, would have  had an opposite
effect.

He said instead, "She's  a queer little girl, you know. Very romantic. Ever
since we  arranged to  have her go off  on a space trip  this summer, she's
been quite excited."

"And just why has no one told me about this space trip?"

"It  was arranged  while you  were away,  and we  forgot It's  nothing more
complicated than that."

Poli's  original  emotions  now  concentrated  themselves  into  a  single,
overwhelming indignation, "Simple, is  it? The poor chick has gone off with
one suitcase, without a decent stitch of clothes to her, and alone at that.
How long will she be away?"

"Now  I won't have  you worrying about  it, Poli.  There will be  plenty of
clothes  for her on  the ship. It's  been all  arranged. Will you  tell Mr.
Anthor, that  I want to  see him? Oh, and  first  is this  the object that
Arcadia has left for me?" He turned it over in his hand.

Poli tossed her  head. "I'm sure I don't know. The letter  was on top of it
and that's  every bit  I can tell  you. Forget to  tell me,  indeed. If her
mother were alive"

Darell, waved her away. "Please call Mr. Anthor."

Anthor's viewpoint on the  matter differed radically from that of Arcadia's
father. He punctuated his initial remarks with clenched fists and tom hair,
and from there, passed on to bitterness.

"Great Space,  what are you waiting for? What are  we both waiting for? Get
the  spaceport  on  the  viewer  and  have  them  contact  the   Unimara. "

"Softly, Pelleas, she's my daughter."

"But it's not your Galaxy."

"Now,  wait. She's  an intelligent  girl, Pelleas,  and she's  thought this
thing out carefully. We  had better follow her thoughts while this thing is
fresh. Do you know what this thing is?"

"No. Why should it matter what it is?'

"Because it's a sound-receiver."

"That thing?"

"It's homemade,  but it will work. I've tested it.  Don't you see? It's her
way of  telling us that she's been a party  to our conversations of policy.
She  knows where Homir  Munn is going  and why.  She's decided it  would be
exciting to go along."

"Oh, Great  Space," groaned the  younger man. "Another mind  for the Second
Foundation to pick."

"Except that there's no  reason why the Second Foundation should, a priori,
suspect a fourteen-year-old girl  of being a danger  unless we do anything
to attract  attention to her, such as calling back a  ship out of space for
no  reason other  than  to take  her off.  Do  you forget  with  whom we're
dealing? How  narrow the  margin is that  separates us from  discovery? How
helpless we are thereafter?"

"But   we   can't   have   everything   depend   on   an   insane   child."

She's  not insane, and  we have no  choice. She  need not have  written the
letter, but  she did it  to keep us from  going to the police  after a lost
child.  Her  letter suggests  that  we  convert the  entire  matter into  a
friendly offer on the part of Munn to take an old friend's daughter off for
a short vacation. And why not? He's been my friend for nearly twenty years.
He's known  her since she was three, when I  brought her back from Trantor.
It's a perfectIy natural  thing, and, in fact, ought to decrease suspicion.
A  spy   does  not  carry  a   fourteen-year-old  niece  about  with  him."

"So. And what will Munn do when he finds her?"

Dr. Darell  heaved his eyebrows once.  "I can't say   but I presume shell
handle him."

But the  house was somehow very  lonely at night and  Dr. Darell found that
the  fate  of  the  Galaxy  made  remarkably little  difference  while  his
daughter's mad little life was in danger.

The excitement on the  Unimara, if involving fewer people, was considerably
more intense.

In  the luggage  compartment, Arcadia  found herself,  in the  first place,
aided  by  experience,  and   in  the  second,  hampered  by  the  reverse.

Thus, she met the  initial acceleration with equanimity and the more subtle
nausea  that  accompanied  the inside-outness  of  the  first jump  through
hyperspace with  stoicism. Both had been  experienced on space hops before,
and she  was tensed for them. She knew  also that luggage compartments were
included  in the  ship's  ventilation-system and  that they  could  even be
bathed  in  wall-light.  This  last, however,  she  excluded  as being  too
unconscionably  unromantic.  She remained  in  the dark,  as a  conspirator
should, breathing  very softly,  and listening to the  little miscellany of
noises that surrounded Homir Munn.

They  were  undistinguished noises,  the  kind  made by  a  man alone.  The
shuffling of shoes, the  rustle of fabric against metal, the soughing of an
upholstered  chair  seat retreating  under  weight,  the sharp  click of  a
control  unit,  or the  soft  slap of  a  palm over  a photoelectric  cell.

Yet, eventually, it was the lack of experience that caught up with Arcadia.
In the  book films and on  the videos, the stowaway  seemed to have such an
infinite capacity for obscurity.  Of course, there was always the danger of
dislodging something  which would  fall with a  crash, or of  sneezing  in
videos you were almost  sure to sneeze; it was an accepted matter. She knew
all this,  and was careful. There was also  the realization that thirst and
hunger might  be encountered. For  this, she was prepared  with ration cans
out of the pantry.  But yet things remained that the films never mentioned,
and it  dawned upon Arcadia with a shock  that, despite the best intentions
in the world, she  could stay hidden in the closet for only a limited time.

And  on  a  one-man  sports-cruiser, such  as  the   Unimara, living  space
consisted, essentially,  of a  single room, so  that there wasn't  even the
risky possibility of sneaking out of the compartment while Munn was engaged
elsewhere.

She waited  frantically for the sounds of sleep to  arise. If only she knew
whether  he snored.  At least  she knew  where the  bunk was and  she could
recognize the  rolling protest of one  when she heard it.  There was a long
breath and then a  yawn. She waited through a gathering silence, punctuated
by the  bunk's soft  protest against a  changed position or  a shifted leg.

The door  of the luggage compartment  opened easily at the  pressure of her
finger, and her craning neck

There was a definite human sound that broke off sharply.

Arcadia solidified. Silence! Still silence!

She tried  to poke  her eyes outside  the door without moving  her head and
failed. The head followed the eyes.

Homir  Munn was  awake, of  course   reading in  bed, bathed in  the soft,
unspreading  bed  light, staring  into  the  darkness with  wide eyes,  and
groping one hand stealthily under the pillow.

Arcadia's  head moved  sharply  back of  itself. Then,  the light  went out
entirely and  Munn's voice said with shaky  sharpness, "I've got a blaster,
and I'm shooting, by the Galaxy"

And Arcadia wailed, "It's only me. Don't shoot."

Remarkable what a fragile  flower romance is. A gun with a nervous operator
behind it can spoil the whole thing.

The light was back on  all over the ship  and Munn was sitting up in bed.
The somewhat grizzled hair  on his thin chest and the sparse one-day growth
on his chin lent  him an entirely fallacious appearance of disreputability.

Arcadia stepped out, yanking  at her metallene jacket which was supposed to
be guaranteed wrinkleproof.

After a  wild moment in which he almost jumped  out of bed, but remembered,
and instead yanked the  sheet up to his shoulders, Munn gargled, "W ... wha
... what"

He was completely incomprehensible.

Arcadia said meekly, "Would you excuse me for a minute? I've got to wash my
hands." She  knew the  geography of the  vessel, and slipped  away quickly.
When she  returned, with her  courage oozing back, Homir  Munn was standing
before her with a faded bathrobe on the outside and a brilliant fury on the
inside.

"What the black holes  of Space are you d ... doing aboard this ship? H ...
how did you get  on here? What do you th ... think  I'm supposed to do with
you? What's going on here?"

He  might  have  asked  questions  indefinitely,  but  Arcadia  interrupted
sweetly, "I just wanted to come along, Uncle Homir."

"Why? I'm not going anywhere?"

"You're  going  to Kalgan  for  information about  the Second  Foundation."

And Munn  let out a wild  howl and collapsed completely.  For one horrified
moment, Arcadia  thought he would  have hysterics or beat  his head against
the wall. He was still holding the blaster and her stomach grew ice-cold as
she watched it.

"Watch  out   Take  it  easy"  was  all  she   could  think  of  to  say.

But he struggled back to relative normality and threw the blaster on to the
bunk with a force  that should have set it off and blown a hole through the
ship's hull.

"How did  you get on?" he  asked slowly, as though  gripping each word with
his teeth  very carefully  to prevent it  from trembling before  letting it
out.

"It was easy. I  just came into the hangar with my suitcase, and said, 'Mr.
Munn's baggage!'  and the man in  charge just waved his  thumb without even
looking up."

"I'll have to take  you back, you know," said Homir, and there was a sudden
wild  glee within  him at  the thought.  By Space,  this wasn't  his fault.

"You  can't,"   said  Arcadia,   calmly,  "it  would   attract  attention."

"What?"

"You know.  The whole  purpose of your  going to Kalgan was  because it was
natural  for you  to  go and  ask for  permission to  look into  the Mule's
records.  And  you've got  to  be  so natural  that  you're  to attract  no
attention at  all. If you go  back with a girl  stowaway, it might even get
into the tele-news reports."

"Where  did you  g ...  get those  notions about  Kalgan? These ...  uh ...
childish" He  was far too flippant for conviction,  of course, even to one
who knew less than did Arcadia.

"I heard,"  she couldn't avoid pride  completely, "with a sound-recorder. I
know all about it  so you've got to let me come along."

"What  about your  father?" He  played a  quick trump.  "For all  he knows,
you're kidnapped ... dead."

"I left a note,"  she said, overtrumping, "and he probably knows he mustn't
make  a fuss,  or  anything. You'll  probably get  a space-gram  from him."

To  Munn the  only explanation  was sorcery,  because the  receiving signal
sounded wildly two seconds after she finished.

She said: "That's my father, I bet," and it was.

The message  wasn't long and it  was addressed to Arcadia.  It said: "Thank
you for  your lovely  present, which I'm sure  you put to good  use. Have a
good time."

"You see," she said, "that's instructions."

Homir  grew  used  to her.  After  a  while, he  was  glad  she was  there.
Eventually,  he  wondered  how  he would  have  made  it  without her.  She
prattIed! She was excited! Most of all, she was completely unconcerned. She
knew the  Second Foundation  was the enemy,  yet it didn't  bother her. She
knew that  on Kalgan,  he was to  deal with a hostile  officialdom, but she
could hardly wait.

Maybe it came of being fourteen.

At  any  rate,  the  week-long  trip  now meant  conversation  rather  than
introspection.  To be  sure,  it wasn't  a very  enlightening conversation,
since it  concerned, almost entirely, the girl's  notions on the subject of
how  best to  treat the Lord  of Kalgan.  Amusing and nonsensical,  and yet
delivered with weighty deliberation.

Homir found himself actually capable of smiling as he listened and wondered
out of  just which gem of historical fiction she  got her twisted notion of
the great universe.

It was  the evening before the  last jump. Kalgan was  a bright star in the
scarcely-twinkling emptiness of the outer reaches of the Galaxy. The ship's
telescope  made  it  a   sparkling  blob  of  barely-perceptible  diameter.

Arcadia  sat cross-legged  in the  good chair.  She was  wearing a  pair of
slacks  and a  none-too-roomy shirt  that belonged  to Homir. Her  own more
feminine   wardrobe  had   been   washed  and   ironed  for   the  landing.

She said,  "I'm going to write historical novels,  you know." She was quite
happy about  the trip. Uncle Homir  didn't the least mind  listening to her
and it  made conversation  so much more  pleasant when you could  talk to a
really   intelligent  person   who  was   serious  about  what   you  said.

She  continued: "I've  read  books and  books about  all  the great  men of
Foundation history.  You know, like Seldon,  Hardin, Mallow, Devers and all
the rest. I've even read most of what you've written about the Mule, except
that  it isn't  much fun to  read those  parts where the  Foundation loses.
Wouldn't you  rather read  a history where  they skipped the  silly, tragic
parts?"

"Yes,  I would,"  Munn assured  her, gravely.  "But it  wouldn't be  a fair
history,  would it, Arkady?  You'd never  get academic respect,  unless you
give the whole story."

"Oh, poof. Who cares  about academic respect?" She found him delightful. He
hadn't  missed calling  her Arkady  for days.  "My novels  are going  to be
interesting and are going  to sell and be famous. What's the use of writing
books unless  you sell them and  become well-known? I don't  want just some
old professors to know me. It's got to be everybody."

Her eyes darkened with pleasure at the thought and she wriggled into a more
comfortable position. "In fact,  as soon as I can get father to let me, I'm
going to  visit Trantor,  so's I can  get background material  on the First
Empire,  you   know.  I   was  born  on   Trantor;  did  you   know  that?"

He did, but he said, "You were?" and put just the right amount of amazement
into his voice. He was rewarded with something between a beam and a simper.

"Uh-huh. My grandmother ... you know, Bayta Darell, you've heard of her ...
was on Trantor once with my grandfather. In fact, that's where they stopped
the Mule,  when all  the Galaxy was at  his feet; and my  father and mother
went  there also when  they were first  married. I  was born there.  I even
lived  there till  mother died,  only I  was just  three then, and  I don't
remember  much   about  it.  Were  you   ever  on  Trantor,  Uncle  Homir?"

"No,  can't  say I  was."  He leaned  back  against the  cold bulkhead  and
listened idly.  Kalgan was very close, and  he felt his uneasiness flooding
back.

"Isn't it  just the most romantic world? My  father says that under Stannel
V, it had more people than any ten worlds nowadays. He says it was just one
big  world of  metals   one big  city   that was  the capital of  all the
Galaxy. He's  shown me pictures that he took on  Trantor. It's all in ruins
now, but it's still  stupendous. I'd just love to see it again. In fact ...
Homir!"

"Yes?"

"Why   don't   we   go   there,   when   we're   finished   with   Kalgan?"

Some of  the fright hurtled back  into his face. "What?  Now don't start on
that. This is business, not pleasure. Remember that."

"But it  is business" she  squeaked. "There might be  incredible amounts of
information on Trantor, don't you think so?*

"No,  I don't  He scrambled  to his  feet "Now  untangle yourself  from the
computer. We've got to  make the last jump, and then you turn in." One good
thing about landing, anyway; he was about fed up with trying to sleep on an
overcoat on the metal floor.

The calculations  were not difficult. The  "Space Route Handbook" was quite
explicit on the Foundation-Kalgan  route. There was the momentary twitch of
the timeless  passage through  hyperspace and the  final light-year dropped
away.

The  sun  of Kalgan  was  a  sun now    large,  bright, and  yellow-white;
invisible behind the portholes that had automatically closed on the sun-lit
side.

Kalgan was only a night's sleep away.

                                     12

                                    Lord

Of all  the worlds  of the Galaxy,  Kalgan undoubtedly had  the most unique
history. That  of the planet Terminus, for instance,  was that of an almost
uninterrupted rise.  That of Trantor, once capital  of the Galaxy, was that
of an almost uninterrupted fall. But Kalgan

Kalgan first gained fame  as the pleasure world of the Galaxy two centuries
before the birth of  Hari Seldon. It was a pleasure world in the sense that
it made  an industry   and an immensely  profitable one, at that   out of
amusement.

And  it was  a  stable industry.  It was  the most  stable industry  in the
Galaxy. When  all the Galaxy perished as  a civilization, little by little,
scarcely a feather's weight  of catastrophe fell upon Kalgan. No matter how
the economy and sociology of the neighboring sectors of the Galaxy changed,
there was always an  elite; and it is always the characteristic of an elite
that  it  possesses  leisure  as   the   great reward  of  its  elite-hood.

Kalgan was at the  service, therefore, successively  and successfully  of
the effete and perfumed  dandies of the Imperial Court with their sparkling
and libidinous ladies; of  the rough and raucous warlords who ruled in iron
the worlds  they had gained  in blood, with their  unbridled and lascivious
wenches;  of the plump  and luxurious  businessmen of the  Foundation, with
their lush and flagitious mistresses.

It was  quite undiscriminating, since they all  had money. And since Kalgan
serviced all and barred  none; since its commodity was in unfailing demand;
since it had the wisdom to interfere in no world's politics, to stand on no
one's legitimacy, it prospered when nothing else did, and remained fat when
all grew thin.

That is,  until the Mule. Then,  somehow, it fell, too,  before a conqueror
who was  impervious to amusement, or  to anything but conquest.  To him all
planets were alike, even Kalgan.

So  for a  decade,  Kalgan found  itself in  the  strange role  of Galactic
metropolis; mistress  of the greatest Empire since  the end of the Galactic
Empire itself.

And then, with the death of the Mule, as sudden as the zoom, came the drop.
The Foundation  broke away. With it  and after it, much  of the rest of the
Mule's  dominions. Fifty years  later there  was left only  the bewildering
memory  of that  short space of  power, like  an opium dream.  Kalgan never
quite recovered. It could never return to the unconcerned pleasure world it
had been,  for the spell of  power never quite releases  its bold. It lived
instead under  a succession of men whom the  Foundation called the Lords of
Kalgan, but who styled themselves First Citizen of the Galaxy, in imitation
of the  Mule's only  title, and who  maintained the fiction  that they were
conquerors too.

The current  Lord of Kalgan had held that position  for five months. He had
gained it originally by virtue of his position at the head of the Kalganian
navy, and through a  lamentable lack of caution on the part of the previous
lord. Yet no one  on Kalgan was quite stupid enough to go into the question
of legitimacy too long  or too closely. These things happened, and are best
accepted.

Yet that  sort of survival of the fittest in  addition to putting a premium
on bloodiness and evil, occasionally allowed capability to come to the fore
as  well.  Lord  Stettin  was competent  enough  and  not  easy to  manage.

Not easy for his eminence, the First Minister, who, with fine impartiality,
had served the last lord as well as the present; and who would, if he lived
long enough, serve the next as honestly.

Nor easy for the  Lady Callia, who was Stettin's more than friend, yet less
than wife.

In Lord Stettin's private apartments the three were alone that evening. The
First  Citizen,  bulky and  glistening  in  the admiral's  uniform that  he
affected,  scowled from  out  the unupholstered  chair in  which he  sat as
stiffly as  the plastic  of which it  was composed. His  First Minister Lev
Meirus,  faced him  with  a far-off  unconcern, his  long,  nervous fingers
stroking absently  and rhythmically  the deep line that  curved from hooked
nose along gaunt and sunken cheek to the point, nearly, of the gray-bearded
chin. The  Lady Callia disposed of herself  gracefully on the deeply furred
covering of  a foamite couch, her full lips trembling  a bit in an unheeded
pout.

"Sir,"  said Meirus   it  was the only  title adhering  to a lord  who was
styled only  First Citizen, "you lack  a certain view of  the continuity of
history. Your own life, with its tremendous revolutions, leads you to think
of  the course  of  civilization as  something equally  amenable  to sudden
change. But it is not."

"The Mule showed otherwise."

"But who  can follow in his footsteps. He was  more than man, remember. And
be, too, was not entirely successful."

"Poochie,"  whimpered  the  Lady Callia,  suddenly,  and  then shrank  into
herself at the furious gesture from the First Citizen.

Lord Stettin  said, harshly, "Do not interrupt,  Callia. Meirus, I am tired
of  inaction. My  predecessor  spent his  life  polishing the  navy into  a
finely-turned instrument that has  not its equal in the Galaxy. And he died
with  the magnificent  machine lying  idle. Am  I to  continue that?  I, an
Admiral of the Navy?

"How  long before  the  machine rusts?  At present,  it is  a drain  on the
Treasury and  returns nothing. Its officers long  for dominion, its men for
loot. All Kalgan desires the return of Empire and glory. Are you capable of
understanding that?"

"These  are but  words that you  use, but  I grasp your  meaning. Dominion,
loot, glory  pleasant when they are obtained, but the process of obtaining
them is  often risky  and always unpleasant.  The first fine  flush may not
last. And in all  history, it has never been wise to attack the Foundation.
Even the Mule would have been wiser to refrain"

There were  tears in the Lady  Callia's blue, empty eyes.  Of late, Poochie
scarcely saw  her, and now, when  he had promised the  evening to her, this
horrible, thin, gray man, who always looked through her rather than at her,
had forced his way in. And Poochie let him. She dared not say anything; was
frightened even of the sob that forced its way out.

But Stettin was speaking now in the voice she hated, hard and Impatient. He
was saying:  "You're a slave to the far past.  The Foundation is greater in
volume and  population, but they are loosely knit and  will fall apart at a
blow. What  holds them together these days is  merely inertia; an inertia I
am strong enough to smash. You are hypnotized by the old days when only the
Foundation had atomic power.  They were able to dodge the last hammer blows
of  the dying  Empire  and then  faced only  the  unbrained anarchy  of the
warlords who would counter  the Foundation's atomic vessels only with hulks
and relics.

"But the  Mule, my dear Meirus, has changed  that. He spread the knowledge,
that the Foundation had  hoarded to itself, through half the Galaxy and the
monopoly in science is gone forever. We can match them."

"And the Second Foundation?" questioned Meirus, coolly.

"And the  Second Foundation?" repeated Stettin as coolly.  "Do you know its
intentions?  It took ten  years to stop  the Mule,  if, indeed, it  was the
factor,  which  some  doubt.  Are you  unaware  that  a  good  many of  the
Foundation's  psychologists and  sociologists are  of the opinion  that the
Seldon Plan  has been completely disrupted  since the days of  the Mule? If
the Plan  has gone, then  a vacuum exists which  I may fill as  well as the
next man."

"Our knowledge of these matters is not great enough to warrant the gamble."

"Our knowledge,  perhaps, but we  have a Foundation visitor  on the planet.
Did you  know that? A Homir Munn  who,  I understand, has written articles
on the  Mule, and has expressed exactly that  opinion, that the Seldon Plan
no longer exists."

The  First Minister  nodded,  "I have  heard of  him,  or at  least  of his
writings. What does he desire?"

"He asks permission to enter the Mule's palace."

"Indeed? It  would be wise to refuse. It is  never advisable to disturb the
superstitions with which a planet is held."

"I will consider that  and we will speak again."

Meirus bowed himself out.

Lady  Callia said  tearfully,  "Are you  angry with  me,  Poochie?" Stettin
turned on  her savagely.  "Have I not told  you before never to  call me by
that ridiculous name in the presence of others?"

"You used to like it."

"Well, I don't any more, and it is not to happen again."

He stared  at her  darkly. It was  a mystery to  him that  he tolerated her
these days.  She was a soft, empty-headed  thing, comfortable to the touch,
with a  pliable affection that was a convenient facet  to a hard life. Yet,
even  that affection was  becoming wearisome.  She dreamed of  marriage, of
being First Lady.

Ridiculous!

She was all very  well when he had been an admiral only   but now as First
Citizen and  future conqueror,  he needed more.  He needed heirs  who could
unite his future dominions, something the Mule had never had, which was why
his Empire  did not survive his strange  nonhuman life. He, Stettin, needed
someone of the great historic families of the Foundation with whom he could
fuse dynasties.

He wondered  testily why he did not rid himself of  Callia now. It would be
no trouble.  She would whine a  bit He dismissed the  thought. She had her
points, occasionally.

Callia was  cheering up  now. The influence  of Graybeard was  gone and her
Poochie's granite  face was softening now. She  lifted herself in a single,
fluid motion and melted toward him.

"You're not going to scold me, are you?"

"No." He patted her  absently. "Now just sit quietly for a while, will you?
I want to think."

"About the man from the Foundation?"

"Yes."

"Poochie?" This was a pause.

"What?"

"Poochie, the  man has a little girl with him,  you said. Remember? Could I
see her when she comes? I never"

"Now what  do you think I  want him to bring  his brat with him  for? Is my
audience room  to be  a grammar school?  Enough of your  nonsense, Callia."

"But Ill  take care  of her, Poochie.  You won't even have  to bother with
her. It's  just that  I hardly ever see  children, and you know  how I love
them."

He looked at her  sardonically. She never tired of this approach. She loved
children; i.e.  his children; i.e. his  legitimate children; i.e. marriage.
He laughed.

"This particular  little piece," he said,  "is a great girl  of fourteen or
fifteen. She's probably as tall as you are."

Callia looked crushed. "Well,  could I, anyway? She could tell me about the
Foundation? I've always wanted  to go there, you know. My grandfather was a
Foundation   man.   Won't   you   take  me   there,   sometime,   Poochie?"

Stettin smiled  at the  thought. Perhaps he  would, as conqueror.  The good
nature that the thought supplied him with made itself felt in his words, "I
will, I will.  And you can see the girl and talk  Foundation to her all you
want. But not near me, understand."

"I  won't bother you,  honestly. I'll have  her in  my own rooms."  She was
happy again. It was  not very often these days that she was allowed to have
her  way.  She  put  her  arms  about  his  neck and  after  the  slightest
hesitation, she felt its  tendons relax and the large head come softly down
upon her shoulder.

                                     13

                                    Lady

Arcadia  felt triumphant.  How life  had changed  since Pelleas  Anthor had
stuck his  silly face up against  her window  and  all because she had the
vision and courage to do what needed to be done.

Here she  was on  Kalgan. She had been  to the great Central  Theater  the
largest in  the Galaxy  and  seen in person some  of the singing stars who
were famous even in  the distant Foundation. She had shopped all on her own
along the  Flowered Path, fashion center of the  gayest world in Space. And
she had  made her  own selections because  Homir just didn't  know anything
about it at all.  The saleswomen raised no objections at all to long, shiny
dresses  with  those vertical  sweeps  that made  her  look so  tall   and
Foundation money  went a long, long  way. Homir had given  her a ten-credit
bill and  when she changed it to Kalganian  "Kalganids," it made a terribly
thick sheaf.

She had  even had  her hair redone   sort of half-short in  back, with two
glistening curls  over each  temple. And it  was treated so  that it looked
goldier than ever; it just shone.

But  this,  this was best  of all. To  be sure, the Palace  of Lord Stettin
wasn't as grand and lavish as the theaters, or as mysterious and historical
as the old palace of the Mule  of which, so far they had only glimpsed the
lonely towers in their  air flight across the planet  but, imagine, a real
Lord. She was rapt in the glory of it.

And not only that. She was actually face to face with his Mistress. Arcadia
capitalized the word in  her mind, because she knew the role such women had
played in  history; knew  their glamour and  power. In fact,  she had often
thought  of being  an  all-powerful and  glittering creature,  herself, but
somehow  mistresses weren't  in  fashion at  the Foundation  just  then and
besides,  her  father  probably  wouldn't let  her,  if  it  came to  that.

Of course, the Lady  Callia didn't quite come up to Arcadia's notion of the
part. For  one thing, she was  rather plump, and didn't  look at all wicked
and dangerous.  just sort  of faded and  near-sighted. Her voice  was high,
too, instead of throaty, and

Callia said, "Would you like more tea, child?"

"I'll have another cup,  thank you, your grace,"  or was it your highness?

Arcadia  continued with  a connoisseur's  condescension, "Those  are lovely
pearls you  are wearing, my lady."  (On the whole, "my  lady" seemed best.)

"Oh? Do you think  so?" Callia seemed vaguely pleased. She removed them and
let them swing milkily to and fro. "Would you like them? You can have them,
if you like."

"Oh, my You really mean" She found them in her hand, then, repelling them
mournfully, she said, "Father wouldn't like it."

"He   wouldn't  like   the   pearls?  But   they're  quite   nice  pearls."

"He  wouldn't like  my taking  them, I  mean. You're  not supposed  to take
expensive presents from other people, he says."

"You aren't? But ... I mean, this was a present to me from Poo ... from the
First Citizen. Was that wrong, do you suppose?"

Arcadia reddened. "I didn't mean--"

But Callia had tired of the subject. She let the pearls slide to the ground
and said,  "You were  going to tell  me about the Foundation.  Please do so
right now."

And Arcadia was suddenly at a loss. What does one say about a world dull to
tears. To her, the Foundation was a suburban town, a comfortable house, the
annoying necessities of education,  the uninteresting eternities of a quiet
life. She said, uncertainly,  "It's just like you view in the book-films, I
suppose."

"Oh, do  you view book-films? They give me such a  headache when I try. But
do  you know I  always love video  stories about  your Traders   such big,
savage men. It's always so exciting. Is your friend, Mr. Munn, one of them?
He doesn't  seem nearly savage enough.  Most of the Traders  had beards and
big bass voices, and  were so domineering with women  don't you think so?"

Arcadia smiled,  glassily. "That's just  part of history, my  lady. I mean,
when the  Foundation was Young, the Traders  were the pioneers pushing back
the  frontiers and  bringing  civilization to  the rest  of the  Galaxy. We
learned all  about that in school. But that time  has passed. We don't have
Traders any more; just corporations and things."

"Really? What  a shame. Then what  does Mr. Munn do? I  mean, if he's not a
Trader."

"Uncle Homir's a librarian."

Callia put  a hand  to her lips  and tittered. "You  mean he  takes care of
book-films. Oh,  my! It  seems like such a  silly thing for a  grown man to
do."

"He's  a very good  librarian, my lady.  It is  an occupation that  is very
highly  regarded at the  Foundation." She  put down the  little, iridescent
teacup upon the milky-metaled table surface.

Her hostess was all  concern. "But my dear child. I'm sure I didn't mean to
offend you. He must  be a very intelligent man. I  could see it in his eyes
as soon as I looked at him. They were so ... so intelligent. And he must be
brave, too, to want to see the Mule's palace."

"Brave?"  Arcadia's  internal awareness  twitched.  This was  what she  was
waiting  for.  Intrigue!  Intrigue!  With great  indifference,  she  asked,
staring idly  at her  thumbtip: "Why must one  be brave to wish  to see the
Mule's palace?"

"Didn't  you know?"  Her eyes were  round, and  her voice sank.  "There's a
curse on  it. When  he died, the  Mule directed that  no one  ever enter it
until the Empire of  the Galaxy is established. Nobody on Kalgan would dare
even to enter the grounds."

Arcadia absorbed that. "But that's superstition"

"Don't say that," Callia was distressed. "Poochie always says that. He says
it's useful to say  it isn't though, in order to maintain his hold over the
people. But  I notice he's never gone in  himself. And neither did Thallos,
who was First Citizen before Poochie." A thought struck her and she was all
curiosity  again:  "But  why  does  Mr.  Munn  want  to  see  the  Palace?"

And it  was here that Arcadia's careful plan could  be put into action. She
knew well from the  books she had read that a ruler's mistress was the real
power behind  the throne, that  she was the very  well-spring of influence.
Therefore, if  Uncle Homir failed with  Lord Stettin  and  she was sure he
would   she must retrieve that failure with Lady  Callia. To be sure, Lady
Callia was something of a puzzle. She didn't seem at all bright. But, well,
all history proved

She said, "There's a reason, my lady  but will you keep it in confidence?"

"Cross my heart," said  Callia, making the appropriate gesture on the soft,
billowing whiteness of her breast.

Arcadia's thoughts  kept a sentence ahead  of her words. "Uncle  Homir is a
great authority  on the Mule, you know. He's  written books and books about
it, and  he thinks that all of Galactic history  has been changed since the
Mule conquered the Foundation."

"Oh, my."

"He thinks the Seldon Plan"

Callia clapped  her hands. "I know about the  Seldon Plan. The videos about
the  Traders were  always all  about the  Seldon Plan.  It was  supposed to
arrange to  have the Foundation win all the  time. Science had something to
do with  it, though I could  never quite see how.  I always get so restless
when I  have to  listen to explanations.  But you go right  ahead, my dear.
It's  different  when you  explain.  You  make everything  seem so  clear."

Arcadia continued,  "Well, don't you see then  that when the Foundation was
defeated  by the  Mule, the Seldon  Plan didn't  work and it  hasn't worked
since. So who will form the Second Empire?"

"The Second Empire?"

"Yes, one  must be formed some  day, but how? That's  the problem, you see.
And there's the Second Foundation."

"The Second Foundation?" She was quite completely lost.

'Yes, they're  the planners of history that  are following in the footsteps
of Seldon.  They stopped the Mule  because he was premature,  but now, they
may be supporting Kalgan."

"Why?"

"Because Kalgan  may now offer the  best chance of being  the nucleus for a
new Empire."

Dimly, Lady Callia seemed to grasp that. "You mean Poochie is going to make
a new Empire."

"We can't  tell for sure. Uncle  Homir thinks so, but  hell have to see the
Mule's records to find out."

"It's    all   very    complicated,"   said   Lady    Callia,   doubtfully.

Arcadia gave up. She had done her best.

Lord  Stettin was  in  a more-or-less  savage humor.  The session  with the
milksop from the Foundation  had been quite unrewarding. It had been worse;
it  had been  embarrassing. To  be absolute  ruler of  twenty-seven worlds,
master of  the Galaxy's greatest military  machine, owner of the universe's
most vaulting  ambition  and  left to argue nonsense  with an antiquarian.

Damnation!

He was to violate the customs of Kalgan, was he? To allow the Mule's palace
to  be ransacked  so that  a fool  could write  another book? The  cause of
science! The  sacredness of knowledge! Great  Galaxy! Were these catchwords
to  be thrown  in  his face  in all  seriousness? Besides   and  his flesh
prickled slightly  there was the matter of the curse. He didn't believe in
it; no intelligent man could. But if he was going to defy it, it would have
to   be  for   a   better  reason   than   any  the   fool  had   advanced.

"What  do you  want?" he snapped,  and Lady  Callia cringed visibly  in the
doorway.

"Are you busy?"

"Yes. I am busy."

"But  there's nobody  here, Poochie.  Couldn't I  even speak  to you  for a
minute?"

"Oh, Galaxy! What do you want? Now hurry."

Her  words stumbled.  "The little  girl told  me they  were going  into the
Mule's palace. I thought we could go with her. It must be gorgeous inside."

"She told  you that,  did she? Well, she  isn't and we aren't.  Now go tend
your own business. I've had about enough of you."

"But, Poochie, why not?  Aren't you going to let them? The little girl said
that you were going to make an Empire!"

"I  don't care  what she  said What  was that?"  He strode to  Callia, and
caught her firmly above the elbow, so that his fingers sank deeply into the
soft flesh, "What did she tell you?"

"You're hurting me. I can't remember what she said, if you're going to look
at me like that."

He released  her, and she stood  there for a moment,  rubbing vainly at the
red marks.  She whimpered, "The little  girl made me promise  not to tell."

"That's too bad. Tell me! Now!"

"Well,  she said  the Seldon Plan  was changed  and that there  was another
Foundation somewheres that was arranging to have you make an Empire. That's
all. She  said Mr. Munn was a very important  scientist and that the Mule's
palace would have proof of all that. That's every bit of what she said. Are
you angry?"

But  Stettin did  not answer.  He left  the room, hurriedly,  with Callia's
cowlike eyes  staring mournfully after  him. Two orders were  sent out over
the official seal of  the First Citizen before the hour was up. One had the
effect of  sending five hundred ships  of the line into  space on what were
officially  to  be termed  as  "war games."  The  other had  the effect  of
throwing a single man into confusion.

Homir Munn ceased his  preparations to leave when that second order reached
him.  It was,  of course, official  permission to  enter the palace  of the
Mule. He read and reread it with anything but joy.

But Arcadia was delighted. She knew what had happened.

Or, at any rate, she thought she did.

                                     14

                                  Anxiety

Poli  placed the  breakfast  on the  table, keeping  one  eye on  the table
news-recorder which quietly disgorged the bulletins of the day. It could be
done  easily  enough  without   loss  of  efficiency,  this  one-eye-absent
business. Since all items of food were sterilely packed in containers which
served  as  discardable  cooking  units,  her  duties  vis-a-vis  breakfast
consisted of nothing more  than choosing the menu, placing the items on the
table, and removing the residue thereafter.

She clacked  her tongue  at what she  saw and moaned  softly in retrospect.

"Oh, people  are so wicked," she  said, and Darell merely  hemmed in reply.

Her  voice took on  the high-pitched  rasp which she  automatically assumed
when  about to bewail  the evil of  the world.  "Now why do  these terrible
Kalganese"  she accented  the second syIlable and gave it a long "a"  "do
like that? You'd think they'd give a body peace. But no, it's just trouble,
trouble, all the time.

"Now look  at that  headline: 'Mobs Riot Before  Foundation Consulate. Oh,
would  I like  to give  them a  piece of  my mind,  if I could.  That's the
trouble with  people; they just don't  remember. They just  don't remember,
Dr. Darell  got no memory at all. Look at the last war after the Mule died
 of course I  was just a little girl then  and  oh, the fuss and trouble.
My own uncle was  killed, him being just in his twenties and only two years
married, with a baby girl. I remember him even yet  blond hair he had, and
a  dimple  in his  chin.  I have  a  trimensional cube  of him  somewheres

"And now  his baby girl has  a son of her own in the  navy and most like if
anything happens

"And we  had the bombardment patrols,  and all the old  men taking turns in
the stratospheric defense   I could imagine what they would have been able
to  do if  the  Kalganese had  come that  far.  My mother  used to  tell us
children about  the food rationing and  the prices and taxes.  A body could
hardly make ends meet

"You'd think  if they  had sense people  would just never want  to start it
again; just have nothing  to do with it. And I suppose it's not people that
do it, either; I suppose even Kalganese would rather sit at home with their
families and  not go fooling around in ships  and getting killed. It's that
awful man,  Stettin. It's a wonder people like that  are let live. He kills
the old man   what's his name  Thallos, and now  he's just spoiling to be
boss of everything.

"And why he wants to fight us, I don't know. He's bound to lose  like they
always do. Maybe it's  all in the Plan, but sometimes I'm sure it must be a
wicked plan to have so much fighting and killing in it, though to be sure I
haven't a word to say about Hari Seldon, who I'm sure knows much more about
that  than I  do and  perhaps I'm  a fool to  question him.  And the  other
Foundation  is as  much  to blame.  They   could stop  Kalgan now  and make
everything fine. They'll do it anyway in the end, and you'd think they'd do
it before there's any damage done."

Dr. Darell looked up. "Did you say something, Poli?"

Poli's eyes  opened wide, then narrowed  angrily. "Nothing, doctor, nothing
at all. I haven't got a word to say. A body could as soon choke to death as
say a word  in this house. It's jump here, and jump  there, but just try to
say a word" and she went off simmering.

Her  leaving made  as  little impression  on  Darell as  did her  speaking.

Kalgan! Nonsense!  A merely  physical enemy! Those had  always been beaten!

Yet he could not  divorce himself of the current foolish crisis. Seven days
earlier,  the mayor  had  asked him  to  be Administrator  of Research  and
Development. He had promised an answer today.

Well

He  stirred uneasily.  Why,  himself! Yet  could he  refuse? It  would seem
strange, and  he dared not seem strange. After all,  what did he care about
Kalgan.   To   him   there   was  only   one   enemy.   Always  had   been.

While his wife had  lived, he was only too glad to shirk the task; to hide.
Those long,  quiet days on Trantor, with the ruins  of the past about them!
The  silence  of  a   wrecked  world  and  the  forgetfulness  of  it  all!

But she  had died. Less than  five years, all told,  it had been; and after
that he  knew that  he could live  only by fighting that  vague and fearful
enemy  that deprived  him  of the  dignity  of manhood  by controlling  his
destiny; that  made life  a miserable struggle against  a foreordained end;
that   made  all   the   universe  a   hateful  and   deadly   chess  game.

Call  it sublimation;  he, himself  did can  it that   but the  fight gave
meaning to his life.

First to the University of Santanni, where he had joined Dr. Kleise. It had
been five years well-spent.

And yet  Kleise was merely a gatherer of data. He  could not succeed in the
real task  and when Darell had felt that as certainty, he knew it was time
to leave.

Kleise may  have worked in secret,  yet he had to  have men working for him
and with  him. He had subjects whose brains he  probed. He had a University
that backed him. All these were weaknesses.

Kleise could  not understand that; and he,  Darell, could not explain that.
They parted enemies. It was well; they had to. He had to leave in surrender
 in case someone watched.

Where Kleise  worked with charts; Darell  worked with mathematical concepts
in the  recesses of  his mind. Kleise  worked with many;  Darell with none.
Kleise  in  a  University;  Darell  in  the  quiet  of  a  suburban  house.

And he was almost there.

A Second Foundationer is not human as far as his cerebrum is concerned. The
cleverest physiologist, the most subtle neurochemist might detect nothing 
yet the difference must be there.

And since the difference  was one of the mind, it was there that it must be
detectable.

Given  a  man like  the Mule    and there  was  no doubt  that the  Second
Foundationers had the Mule's  powers, whether inborn or acquired  with the
power  of detecting and  controlling human  emotions, deduce from  that the
electronic circuit  required, and deduce from that  the last details of the
encephalograph   on   which   it   could   not  help   but   be   betrayed.

And  now Kleise had  returned into his  life, in  the person of  his ardent
young pupil, Anthor.

Folly! Folly!  With his graphs and  charts of people who  had been tampered
with. He had  learned to detect that years ago, but of  what use was it. He
wanted the arm; not  the tool. Yet he had to agree to join Anthor, since it
was the quieter course.

Just as  now he would become Administrator  of Research and Development. It
was  the  quieter  course!  And  so  he  remained  a  conspiracy  within  a
conspiracy.

The thought of Arcadia  teased him for a moment, and he shuddered away from
it. Left to himself,  it would never have happened. Left to himself, no one
would   ever  have   been   endangered  but   himself.  Left   to  himself

He felt  the anger rising-against  the dead Kleise, the  living Anthor, all
the well-meaning fools

Well, she  could take care of  herself. She was a  very mature little girl.

She could take care of herself!

It was a whisper in his mind

Yet could she?

At the moment, that  Dr. Darell told himself mournfully that she could, she
was sitting in the  coldly austere anteroom of the Executive Offices of the
First Citizen  of the Galaxy. For half an hour  she had been sitting there,
her eyes sliding slowly about the walls. There had been two armed guards at
the door  when she had entered with Homir Munn.  They hadn't been there the
other times.

She  was  alone,  now,  yet  she  sensed  the unfriendliness  of  the  very
furnishings of the room. And for the first time.

Now, why should that be?

Homir was with Lord Stettin. Well, was that wrong?

It  made her  furious.  In similar  situations  in the  book-films and  the
videos, the hero foresaw  the conclusion, was prepared for it when it came,
and she  she just sat there. Anything could happen. Anything! And she just
sat there.

Well,   back   again.  Think   it   back.  Maybe   something  would   come.

For  two weeks,  Homir had nearly  lived inside  the Mule's palace.  He had
taken  her  once, with  Stettin's  permission.  It was  large and  gloomily
massive,  shrinking from  the  touch of  life  to lie  sleeping within  its
ringing memories,  answering the footsteps  with a hollow boom  or a savage
clatter. She hadn't liked it.

Better  the great,  gay  highways of  the  capital city;  the theaters  and
spectacles of a world  essentially poorer than the Foundation, yet spending
more of its wealth on display.

Homir would return in the evening, awed

"It's a  dream-world for me," he  would whisper. "If I  could only chip the
palace down  stone by  stone, layer by  layer of the aluminum  sponge. If I
could  carry   it  back  to  Terminus  What   a  museum  it  would  make."

He  seemed to  have  lost that  early  reluctance. He  was eager,  instead;
glowing.  Arcadia knew  that  by the  one sure  sign; he  practically never
stuttered throughout that period.

One  time,  he  said,  "There  are  abstracts  of the  records  of  General
Pritcher"

"I know him. He  was the Foundation renegade, who combed the Galaxy for the
Second Foundation, wasn't he?"

"Not   exactly  a   renegade,   Arkady.  The   Mule  had   Converted  him."

"Oh, it's the same thing."

"Galaxy,  that combing  you  speak of  was  a hopeless  task. The  original
records  of the  Seldon Convention  that established both  Foundations five
hundred years  ago, make only one reference  to the Second Foundation. They
say if's located 'at the other end of the Galaxy at Star's End.' That's all
the Mule  and Pritcher had to go on. They had  no method of recognizing the
Second Foundation even if they found it. What madness!

"They  have records"   he  was speaking  to himself, but  Arcadia listened
eagerly   "which must  cover nearly a  thousand worlds, yet  the number of
worlds available  for study must have been closer to  a million. And we are
no better off"

Arcadia broke in anxiously, "Shhh-h" in a tight hiss.

Homir  froze,   and  slowly  recovered.  "Let's   not  talk,"  he  mumbled.

And now  Homir was with Lord  Stettin and Arcadia waited  outside alone and
felt the  blood squeezing out of  her heart for no  reason at all. That was
more  frightening  than  anything   else.  That  there  seemed  no  reason.

On the other side  of the door, Homir, too, was living in a sea of gelatin.
He was  fighting, with furious  intensity, to keep from  stuttering and, of
course,  could scarcely speak  two consecutive  words clearly as  a result.

Lord  Stettin   was  in   full  uniform,  six-feet-six,   large-jawed,  and
hard-mouthed.  His  balled, arrogant  fists  kept  a powerful  time to  his
sentences.

"Well, you  have had two weeks,  and you come to  me with tales of nothing.
Come, sir,  tell me  the worst. Is  my Navy to  be cut to ribbons?  Am I to
fight the ghosts of the Second Foundation as well as the men of the First?"

"I ... I repeat,  my lord, I am no p ... pre ... predictor. I ... I am at a
complete ... loss."

"Or do you wish to go back to warn your countrymen? To deep Space with your
play-acting. I  want the truth or  Ill have it out  of you along with half
your guts."

"I'm t ... telling  only the truth, and I'll have you re ... remember, my l
... lord, that I  am a citizen of the Foundation. Y ... you cannot touch me
without harvesting m ... m ... more than you count on."

The Lord of Kalgan  laughed uproariously. "A threat to frighten children. A
horror  with which  to  beat back  an idiot.  Come, Mr.  Munn, I  have been
patient  with you.  I have  listened to  you for  twenty minutes  while you
detailed wearisome nonsense to me which must have cost you sleepless nights
to compose.  It was wasted effort.  I know you are  here not merely to rake
through the Mule's dead ashes and to warm over the cinders you findyou come
here for more than you have admitted. Is that not true?"

Homir Munn could no  more have quenched the burning horror that grew in his
eyes than,  at that moment, he could have  breathed. Lord Stettin saw that,
and clapped  the Foundation man upon his shoulder so  that he and the chair
he sat on reeled under the impact.

"Good. Now let us be frank. You are investigating the Seldon Plan. You know
that it no longer holds. You know, perhaps, that I am the inevitable winner
now; I and my  heirs. Well, man, what matters it who established the Second
Empire, so  long as it is established. History  plays no favorites, eh? Are
you   afraid  to   tell   me?  You   see   that  I   know  your   mission."

Munn said thickly, "What is it y ... you w ... want?"

"Your presence.  I would not wish  the Plan spoiled through overconfidence.
You understand  more of these things than I do;  you can detect small flaws
that I  might miss.  Come, you will be  rewarded in the end;  you will have
your fair glut of  the loot. What can you expect at the Foundation? To turn
the  tide of a  perhaps inevitable defeat?  To lengthen  the war? Or  is it
merely a patriotic desire to die for your country?"

"I  ... I"  He finally  spluttered into  silence. Not  a word  would come.

"You will stay," said the Lord of Kalgan, confidently. "You have no choice.
Wait"   an  almost  forgotten afterthought   "I  have information  to the
effect   that   your   niece   is  of   the   family   of  Bayta   Darell."

Homir uttered  a startled: "Yes." He could not  trust himself at this point
to be capable of weaving anything but cold truth.

"It is a family of note on the Foundation?"

Homir  nodded,  "To  whom  they  would  certainly  b ...  brook  no  harm."

"Harm! Don't be a  fool, man; I am meditating the reverse. How old is she?"

"Fourteen."

"Sol Well,  not even the Second Foundation,  or Hari Seldon, himself, could
stop time from passing or girls from becoming women."

With that, he turned on his heel and strode to a draped door which he threw
open violently.

He thundered,  "What in Space have you  dragged your shivering carcass here
for?"

The Lady  Callia blinked at him, and said in a  small voice, "I didn't know
anyone was with you."

"Well, there  is. I'll speak  to you later of  this, but now I  want to see
your back, and quickly."

Her footsteps were a fading scurry in the corridor.

Stettin returned,  "She is  a remnant of  an interlude that  has lasted too
long. It will end soon. Fourteen, you say?"

Homir stared at him with a brand-new horror!

Arcadia  started  at the  noiseless  opening of  a  door   jumping at  the
jangling sliver  of movement  it made in  the comer of her  eye. The finger
that crooked frantically at her met no response for long moments, and then,
as if in response to the cautions enforced by the very sight of that white,
trembling figure, she tiptoed her way across the floor.

Their  footsteps were  a  taut whisper  in the  corridor.  It was  the Lady
Callia, of course, who  held her hand so tightly that it hurt, and for some
reason, she  did not mind following her. Of the  Lady Callia, at least, she
was not afraid.

Now, why was that?

They  were in a  boudoir now, all  pink fluff  and spun sugar.  Lady Callia
stood with her back against the door.

She said,  "This was our private  way to me ... to  my room, you know, from
his office.  His, you know." And  she pointed with a  thumb, as though even
the  thought   of  him  were   grinding  her  soul  to   death  with  fear.

"It's so  lucky ... its so  lucky" Her pupils had  blackened out the blue
with their size.

"Can you tell me" began Arcadia timidly.

And Callia  was in frantic motion.  "No, child, no. There  is no time. Take
off  your  clothes. Please.  Please.  I'll  get you  more,  and they  won't
recognize you."

She was in the  closet, throwing useless bits of flummery in reckless heaps
upon  the ground,  looking madly  for something  a girl could  wear without
becoming a living invitation to dalliance.

"Here, this will do.  It will have to. Do you have money? Here, take it all
 and  this." She  was stripping her ears  and fingers. "Just go  home  go
home to your Foundation."

"But Homir  ... my uncle." She protested  vainly through the muffling folds
of the sweet-smelling and  luxurious spun-metal being forced over her head.

"He won't  leave. Poochie will hold him forever,  but you mustn't stay. Oh,
dear, don't you understand?"

"No." Arcadia forced a standstill, "I don't understand."

Lady Callia squeezed her  hands tightly together. "You must go back to warn
your people  there will be  war. Isn't that clear?"  Absolute terror seemed
paradoxically to  have lent a lucidity  to her thoughts and  words that was
entirely out of character. "Now come!"

Out another way! Past officials who stared after them, but saw no reason to
stop  one whom  only the Lord  of Kalgan  could stop with  impunity. Guards
clicked   heels  and   presented  arms   when  they  went   through  doors.

Arcadia breathed only on occasion through the years the trip seemed to take
 yet from the  first crooking of the white finger to the time she stood at
the outer gate, with  people and noise and traffic in the distance was only
twenty-five minutes.

She looked back, with a sudden frightened pity. "I ... I ... don't know why
you're doing  this, my  lady, but thanks  What's going to  happen to Uncle
Homir?"

"I  don't know,"  wailed the other.  "Can't you  leave? Go straight  to the
spaceport.  Don't  wait. He  may  be  looking for  you  this very  minute."

And still Arcadia lingered. She would be leaving Homir; and, belatedly, now
that she felt the  free air about her, she was suspicious. "But what do you
care if he does?"

Lady Callia  bit her lower lip  and muttered, "I can't  explain to a little
girl like you. It would be improper. Well, you'll be growing up and I ... I
met Poochie  when I was sixteen.  I can't have you  about, you know." There
was a half-ashamed hostility in her eyes.

The implications froze Arcadia. She whispered: "What will he do to you when
he finds out?"

And she  whimpered back: "I don't  know," and threw her  arm to her head as
she left at a  half-run, back along the wide way to the mansion of the Lord
of Kalgan.

But for  one eternal second, Arcadia  still did not  move, for in that last
moment  before  Lady  Callia   left,  Arcadia  had  seen  something.  Those
frightened, frantic eyes had  momentarily  flashingly  lit up with a cold
amusement.

A vast, inhuman amusement.

It was much to  see in such a quick flicker of a  pair of eyes, but Arcadia
had no doubt of what she saw.

She was  running now  running  wildly  searching madly  for an unoccupied
public  booth at  which  one could  press a  button for  public conveyance.

She was  not running from Lord Stettin; not from him  or from all the human
hounds he  could place at her heels  not  from all his twenty-seven worlds
rolled  into  a  single  gigantic  phenomenon,  hallooing  at  her  shadow.

She was running from  a single, frail woman who had helped her escape. From
a creature who had loaded her with money and jewels; who had risked her own
life to  save her. From an entity she knew, certainly  and finally, to be a
woman of the Second Foundation.

An air-taxi  came to  a soft clicking halt  in the cradle. The  wind of its
coming brushed  against Arcadia's face and stirred  at the hair beneath the
softly-furred hood Callia had given her.

"Where'll it be, lady?"

She  fought desperately to  low-pitch her voice  to make  it not that  of a
child. "How many spaceports in the city?"

"Two. Which one ya want?"

"Which is closer?"

He stared at her: "Kalgan Central, lady."

"The other one, please. Ive got the money." She had a twenty-Kalganid note
in her  hand. The denomination of  the note made little  difference to her,
but the taxi-man grinned appreciatively.

"Anything ya say, lady. Sky-line cabs take ya anywhere."

She cooled  her cheek against the slightly  musty upholstery. The lights of
the city moved leisurely below her.

What should she do? What should she do?

It was in that  moment that she knew she was a  stupid, stupid little girl,
away from her father, and frightened. Her eyes were full of tears, and deep
down in her throat, there was a small, soundless cry that hurt her insides.

She wasn't afraid that  Lord Stettin would catch her. Lady Callia would see
to  that. Lady  Callia!  Old, fat,  stupid, but  she held  on to  her lord,
somehow.  Oh,   it  was   clear  enough,  now.    Everything    was  clear.

That tea with Callia at which she had been so smart. Clever little Arcadia!
Something  inside  Arcadia  choked  and hated  itself.  That  tea had  been
maneuvered, and then Stettin had probably been maneuvered so that Homir was
allowed  to inspect  the Palace  after all.  She,  the foolish  Callia, has
wanted it so, and  arranged to have smart little Arcadia supply a foolproof
excuse, one  which would arouse no suspicions in  the minds of the victims,
and yet involve a minimum of interference on her part.

Then why was she free? Homir was a prisoner, of course

Unless

Unless she went back  to the Foundation as a decoy  a decoy to lead others
into the hands of ... of them.

So she couldn't return to the Foundation

"Spaceport, lady."  The air-taxi  had come to  a halt. Strange!  She hadn't
even noticed.

What a dream-world it was.

"Thanks,"  she pushed  the  bill at  him  without seeing  anything and  was
stumbling  out  the  door,   then  running  across  the  springy  pavement.

Lights. Unconcerned men and women. Large gleaming bulletin boards, with the
moving  figures  that  followed every  single  spaceship  that arrived  and
departed.

Where was  she going? She didn't care. She only  knew that she wasn't going
to the Foundation! Anywhere else at all would suit.

Oh, thank  Seldon, for that forgetful moment   that last split-second when
Callia wearied of  her act because she had to do only  with a child and had
let her amusement spring through.

And  then  something else  occurred  to  Arcadia, something  that had  been
stirring and moving at  the base of her brain ever since the flight began 
something that forever killed the fourteen in her.

And she knew that she must escape.

That above  all. Though  they located every conspirator  on the Foundation;
though they caught her own father; she could not dared not, risk a warning.
She could  not risk her  own life  not  in the slightest   for the entire
realm of Terminus. She was the most important person in the Galaxy. She was
the only important person in the Galaxy.

She  knew that  even as  she stood  before the ticket-machine  and wondered
where to go.

Because in all the  Galaxy, she and she alone, except for they, themselves,
knew the location of the Second Foundation.

                                     15

                              Through the Grid

TRANTOR  By the  middle of the  Interregnum, Trantor  was a shadow.  In the
midst of  the colossal ruins, there lived  a small community of farmers....

ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA

There is  nothing, never has been anything, quite  like a busy spaceport on
the outskirts  of a capital city  of a populous planet.  There are the huge
machines  resting  mightily  in  their cradles.  If  you  choose your  time
properly, there  is the impressive  sight of the sinking  giant dropping to
rest or,  more hair-raising still, the swiftening  departure of a bubble of
steel. All processes involved are nearly noiseless. The motive power is the
silent  surge   of  nucleons   shifting  into  more   compact  arrangements

In terms  of area, ninety-five percent  of the port has  just been referred
to. Square  miles are reserved for the machines, and  for the men who serve
them and for the calculators that serve both.

Only five  percent of the port  is given over to  the floods of humanity to
whom it  is the way station  to all the stars of  the Galaxy. It is certain
that  very   few  of  the  anonymous   many-headed  stop  to  consider  the
technological  mesh that knits  the spaceways.  Perhaps some of  them might
itch occasionally  at the thought  of the thousands of  tons represented by
the sinking  steel that  looks so small  off in the distance.  One of those
cyclopean  cylinders could,  conceivably, miss  the guiding beam  and crash
half a mile from  its expected landing point  through the glassite roof of
the immense  waiting room perhaps   so that only a  thin organic vapor and
some  powdered phosphates  would be left  behind to  mark the passing  of a
thousand men.

It could  never happen, however, with  the safety devices in  use; and only
the badly  neurotic would consider the possibility  for more than a moment.

Then what  do they think  about? It is not  just a crowd, you  see. It is a
crowd with  a purpose. That purpose hovers over  the field and thickens the
atmosphere.  Lines  queue  up;  parents  herd their  children;  baggage  is
maneuvered   in   precise   masses     people   are    going   somewheres.

Consider  then the  complete  psychic isolation  of a  single unit  of this
terribly intent  mob that does not  know where to go;  yet at the same time
feels more intensely than  any of the others possibly can, the necessity of
going somewheres; anywhere! Or almost anywhere!

Even  lacking telepathy  or  any of  the crudely  definite methods  of mind
touching  mind, there is  a sufficient  clash in atmosphere,  in intangible
mood, to suffice for despair.

To suffice? To overflow, and drench, and drown.

Arcadia Darell, dressed in  borrowed clothes, standing on a borrowed planet
in a  borrowed situation of what seemed even to  be a borrowed life, wanted
earnestly the safety of the womb. She didn't know that was what she wanted.
She only knew that  the very openness of the open world was a great danger.
She  wanted a  closed  spot somewhere   somewhere  far   somewhere  in an
unexplored  nook  of  the   universe    where  no  one  would  ever  look.

And  there  she was,  age  fourteen  plus, weary  enough  for eighty  plus,
frightened enough for five minus.

What stranger of the hundreds that brushed past her  actually brushed past
her, so  that she could feel their touch   was a Second Foundationer? What
stranger could not help  but instantly destroy her for her guilty knowledge
  her unique  knowledge   of  knowing  where the  Second Foundation  was?

And the voice that  cut in on her was a thunderclap that iced the scream in
her throat into a voiceless slash.

"Look, miss," it said,  irritably, "are you using the ticket machine or are
you just standing there?"

It was  the first she realized  that she was standing  in front of a ticket
machine. You  put a high denomination bill into  the clipper which sank out
of sight.  You pressed the button below your  destination and a ticket came
out  together  with  the  correct change  as  determined  by an  electronic
scanning device that never made a mistake. It was a very ordinary thing and
there  is  no  cause  for anyone  to  stand  before  it  for five  minutes.

Arcadia  plunged a two-hundred  credit into  the clipper, and  was suddenly
aware of  the button labeled  "Trantor." Trantor, dead capital  of the dead
Empire   the  planet on  which she was  born. She  pressed it in  a dream.
Nothing happened,  except that the red letters  flicked on and off, reading
172.18 172.18 172.18

It was the amount she was short. Another two-hundred credit. The ticket was
spit out  towards her.  It came loose  when she touched it,  and the change
tumbled out afterward.

She seized it and  ran. She felt the man behind her pressing close, anxious
for his own chance  at the machine, but she twisted out from before him and
did not look behind.

Yet there was nowhere to run. They were all her enemies.

Without quite  realizing it,  she was watching the  gigantic, glowing signs
that puffed  into the air:  Steffani, Anacreon, Fermus There  was even one
that  ballooned,  Terminus,   and  she longed  for  it, but  did not  dare

For a  trifling sum, she could have hired a  notifier which could have been
set  for any  destination she  cared and  which would,  when placed  in her
purse, make itself heard only to her, fifteen minutes before take-off time.
But such devices are for people who are reasonably secure, however; who can
pause to think of them.

And then, attempting to look both ways simultaneously, she ran head-on into
a soft abdomen. She  felt the startled outbreath and grunt, and a hand come
down on her arm.  She writhed desperately but lacked breath to do more than
mew a bit in the back of her throat.

Her captor  held her firmly and waited. Slowly, he  came into focus for her
and she  managed to look at him. He was rather  plump and rather short. His
hair was  white and copious, being brushed back  to give a pompadour effect
that  looked  strangely  incongruous  above a  round  and  ruddy face  that
shrieked its peasant origin.

"What's the matter?" he said finally, with a frank and twinkling curiosity.
"You look scared."

"Sorry,"  muttered  Arcadia in  a  frenzy.  "Ive got  to  go. Pardon  me."

But he disregarded that entirely, and said, "Watch out, little girl. You'll
drop your  ticket." And he lifted it from  her resistless white fingers and
looked at it with every evidence of satisfaction.

"I  thought so,"  he said, and  then bawled  in bull-like tones,  "Mommuh!"

A  woman was  instantly  at his  side, somewhat  more short,  somewhat more
round, somewhat  more ruddy. She wound a finger about  a stray gray lock to
shove it beneath a well-outmoded hat.

"Pappa," she  said, reprovingly,  "why do you  shout in a  crowd like that?
People look at you  like you were crazy. Do you think you are on the farm?"

And  she smiled  sunnily at  the unresponsive  Arcadia, and added,  "He has
manners like  a bear." Then, sharply, "Pappa, let  go the little girl. What
are you doing?"

But Pappa simply waved  the ticket at her. "Look," he said, "she's going to
Trantor."

Mamma's face  was a  sudden beam, "You're  from Trantor? Let go  her arm, I
say, Pappa."  She turned the  overstuffed valise she was  carrying onto its
side and forced Arcadia to sit down with a gentle but unrelenting pressure.
"Sit down,"  she said, "and rest  your little feet. It  will be no ship yet
for an hour and the benches are crowded with sleeping loafers. You are from
Trantor?"

Arcadia  drew a deep  breath and gave  in. Huskily,  she said, "I  was born
there."

And Mamma clapped her  hands gleefully, "One month we've been here and till
now we  met nobody from home. This is very  nice. Your parents" she looked
about vaguely.

"I'm not with my parents," Arcadia said, carefully.

"All  alone?  A  little girl  like  you?"  Mamma was  at  once  a blend  of
indignation and sympathy, "How does that come to be?"

"Mamma," Pappa  plucked at her sleeve, "let  me tell you. There's something
wrong. I think she's  frightened." His voice, though obviously intended for
a whisper  was quite plainly audible  to Arcadia. "She was  running  I was
watching her  and not looking where she was going. Before I could step out
of  the way,  she  bumped into  me. And  you  know what?  I think  she's in
trouble."

"So shut  your mouth, Pappa. Into you, anybody  could bump." But she joined
Arcadia on the valise, which creaked wearily under the added weight and put
an  arm about  the  girl's trembling  shoulder. "You're  running  away from
somebody,  sweetheart?  Don't  be   afraid  to  tell  me.  III  help  you."

Arcadia looked across at  the kind gray eyes of the woman and felt her lips
quivering. One part of her brain was telling her that here were people from
Trantor, with  whom she could go, who could help  her remain on that planet
until she could decide  what next to do, where next to go. And another part
of her brain, much  the louder, was telling her in jumbled incoherence that
she did  not remember her mother,  that she was weary  to death of fighting
the universe, that she  wanted only to curl into a little hall with strong,
gentle  arms about her,  that if her  mother had  lived, she might  ... she
might

And for  the first  time that night,  she was crying; crying  like a little
baby,  and glad  of it;  clutching tightly  at the old-fashioned  dress and
dampening a corner of it thoroughly, while soft arms held her closely and a
gentle hand stroked her curls.

Pappa  stood  helplessly  looking  at the  pair,  fumbling  futilely for  a
handkerchief which, when produced, was snatched from his hand. Mamma glared
an admonition of quietness at him. The crowds surged about the little group
with  the true  indifference of  disconnected crowds everywhere.  They were
effectively alone.

Finally, the  weeping trickled to a halt, and  Arcadia smiled weakly as she
dabbed at red eyes  with the borrowed handkerchief. "Golly," she whispered,

"Shh.  Shh.  Don't talk,"  said Mamma,  fussily, "just  sit and rest  for a
while. Catch your breath.  Then tell us what's wrong, and you'll see, we'll
fix it up, and everything will be all right."

Arcadia scrabbled  what remained of  her wits together. She  could not tell
them the  truth. She could tell nobody the truth And  yet she was too worn
to invent a useful lie.

She said, whisperingly, "I'm better, now."

"Good," said  Mamma. "Now  tell me why  youre in trouble.  You did nothing
wrong? Of course, whatever  you did, well help you; but tell us the truth."

"For  a  friend from  Trantor,  anything," added  Pappa, expansively,  "eh,
Mamma?"

"Shut   your   mouth,   Pappa,"   was   the   response,   without   rancor.

Arcadia was  groping in her purse. That, at  least, was still hers, despite
the rapid clothes-changing forced upon her in Lady Callia's apartments. She
found what she was looking for and handed it to Mamma.

"These  are my  papers,"  she said,  diffidently. It  was  shiny, synthetic
parchment which  had been issued her by  the Foundation's ambassador on the
day  of her  arrival and  which had  been countersigned by  the appropriate
Kalganian official.  It was large, florid,  and impressive. Mamma looked at
it helplessly,  and passed  it to Pappa  who absorbed its  contents with an
impressive pursing of the lips.

He said, "You're from the Foundation?"

"Yes. But I was born in Trantor. See it says that"

"Ah-hah. It looks all  right to me. You're named Arcadia, eh? That's a good
Trantorian  name. But  where's your  uncle? It  says here  you came  in the
company of Homir Munn, uncle."

"He's been arrested," said Arcadia, drearily.

"Arrested!"   from the two of  them at once. "What  for?" asked Mamma. "He
did something?"

She shook her head. "I don't know. We were just on a visit. Uncle Homir had
business with Lord Stettin  but" She needed no effort to act a shudder. It
was there.

Pappa was  impressed. "With Lord Stettin. Mm-m-m, your  uncle must be a big
man."

"I don't know  what it was all about, but Lord Stettin  wanted me to stay"
She was  recalling the last words of Lady Callia,  which had been acted out
for her  benefit. Since Callia, as  she now knew, was  an expert, the story
could do for a second time.

She paused, and Mamma said interestedly, "And why you?"

"I'm not  sure. He ...  he wanted to have  dinner with me all  alone, but I
said no, because I wanted Uncle Homir along. He looked at me funny and kept
holding my shoulder."

Pappa's mouth was a little open, but Mamma was suddenly red and angry. "How
old are you, Arcadia?"

"Fourteen and a half, almost."

Mamma drew  a sharp breath and said, "That such  people should be let live.
The dogs in the streets are better. You're running from him, dear, is not?"

Arcadia nodded.

Mamma said,  "Pappa, go right to Information and  find out exactly when the
ship to Trantor comes to berth. Hurry!"

But  Pappa took  one  step and  stopped. Loud  metallic words  were booming
overhead,  and  five  thousand pairs  of  eyes  looked startledly  upwards.

"Men and women," it  said, with sharp force. "The airport is being searched
for a dangerous fugitive, and it is now surrounded. No one can enter and no
one can leave. The  search will, however, be conducted with great speed and
no ships  will reach  or leave berth  during the interval, so  you will not
miss your ship. I repeat, no one will miss his ship. The grid will descend.
None of  you will  move outside your  square until the grid  is removed, as
otherwise we will be forced to use our neuronic whips."

During the minute or less in which the voice dominated the vast dome of the
spaceport's waiting  room, Arcadia could not have moved  if all the evil in
the Galaxy  had concentrated itself into  a ball and hurled  itself at her.

They could mean only  her. It was not even necessary to formulate that idea
as a specific thought. But why

Callia had engineered her  escape. And Callia was of the Second Foundation.
Why, then,  the search  now? Had Callia  failed? Could Callia  fail? Or was
this   part  of   the  plan,   the  intricacies   of  which   escaped  her?

For a vertiginous moment, she wanted to jump up and shout that she gave up,
that she would go with them, that ... that

But Mamma's  hand was on her  wrist. "Quick! "Quick! Well  go to the lady's
room before they start."

Arcadia did not understand. She merely followed blindly. They oozed through
the  crowd, frozen  as it  was into  clumps, with  the voice  still booming
through its last words.

The grid was descending  now, and Pappa, openmouthed, watched it come down.
He had heard  of it and read of it, but had  never actually been the object
of it. It glimmered  in the air, simply a series of cross-hatched and tight
radiation-beams that  set the air  aglow in a harmless  network of flashing
light.

It always was so  arranged as to descend slowly from above in order that it
might  represent  a  falling   net  with  all  the  terrific  psychological
implications of entrapment.

It  was  at  waist-level  now,  ten  feet  between glowing  lines  in  each
direction. In  his own hundred square feet,  Pappa found himself alone, yet
the adjoining squares were  crowded. He felt himself conspicuously isolated
but  knew that to  move into the  greater anonymity  of a group  would have
meant crossing one of  those glowing lines, stirring an alarm, and bringing
down the neuronic whip.

He waited.

He could  make out over the heads of the eerily  quiet and waiting mob, the
far-off stir  that was the line of policemen  covering the vast floor area,
lighted square by lighted square.

It was  a long time before a uniform stepped  into his square and carefully
noted its co-ordinates into an official notebook.

"Papers!"

Pappa handed  them over, and  they were flipped through  in expert fashion.

"You're Preem  Palver, native of Trantor, on  Kalgan for a month, returning
to Trantor. Answer, yes or no."

"Yes, yes."

"What's your business on Kalgan?"

"I'm trading representative of our farm co-operative. I've been negotiating
terms with the Department of Agriculture on Kalgan.

"Um-m-m.  Your wife is  with you? Where  is she?  She is mentioned  in your
papers."

"Please. My wife is in the" He pointed.

"Hanto,"    roared   the    policeman.   Another   uniform    joined   him.

The first  one said,  dryly, "Another dame  in the can, by  the Galaxy. The
place must  be busting  with them. Write  down her name."  He indicated the
entry in the papers which gave it.

"Anyone else with you?"

"My niece."

"She's not mentioned in the papers."

"She came separately."

"Where is she? Never mind, I know. Write down the niece's name, too, Hanto.
What's her  name? Write down  Arcadia Palver. You stay  right here, Palver.
We'll take care of the women before we leave."

Pappa waited  interminably. And then, long,  long after, Mamma was marching
toward  him, Arcadia's  hand  firmly in  hers, the  two  policemen trailing
behind her.

They entered  Pappa's square, and one  said, "Is this noisy  old woman your
wife?"

"Yes, sir," said Pappa, placatingly.

"Then you'd  better tell her she's liable to get  into trouble if she talks
the  way she  does  to the  First  Citizen's police."  He straightened  his
shoulders angrily. "Is this your niece?"

"Yes, sir."

"I want her papers."

Looking straight at her  husband, Mamma slightly, but no less firmly, shook
her head.

A short  pause, and Pappa said  with a weak smile, "I  don't think I can do
that."

"What do you mean you can't do that?" The policeman thrust out a hard palm.
"Hand it over."

"Diplomatic immunity," said Pappa, softly.

"What do you mean?"

"I  said  I  was  trading  representative  of  my  farm  co-operative.  I'm
accredited   to   the  Kalganian   government   as   an  official   foreign
representative and my papers prove it. I showed them to you and now I don't
want to be bothered any more."

For a  moment, the  policeman was taken  aback. "I got to  see your papers.
It's orders."

"You go away," broke  in Mamma, suddenly. "When we want you, we'll send for
you, you ... you bum."

The policeman's lips tightened. "Keep your eye on them, Hanto. I'll get the
lieutenant."

"Break a leg!" called  Mamma after him. Someone laughed, and then choked it
off suddenly.

The  search was  approaching  its end.  The crowd  was  growing dangerously
restless. Forty-five minutes had elapsed since the grid had started falling
and that  is too long for best effects.  Lieutenant Dirige threaded his way
hastily, therefore, toward the dense center of the mob.

"Is this  the girl?" he asked  wearily. He looked at  her and she obviously
fitted the description. All this for a child.

He said, "Her papers, if you please?"

Pappa began, "I have already explained"

"I know what you  have explained, and I'm sorry," said the lieutenant, "but
I have  my orders,  and I can't  help them. If  you care to  make a protest
later,   you   may.   Meanwhile,  if   necessary,   I   must  use   force."

There was a pause, and the lieutenant waited patiently.

Then   Pappa    said,   huskily,   "Give   me    your   papers,   Arcadia."

Arcadia  shook her  head in  panic, but  Pappa nodded  his head.  "Don't be
afraid. Give them to me."

Helplessly  she  reached out  and  let  the documents  change hands.  Pappa
fumbled them open and looked carefully through them, then handed them over.
The  lieutenant in  his  turn looked  through  them carefully.  For a  long
moment, he raised his  eyes to rest them on Arcadia, and then he closed the
booklet with a sharp snap.

"All in order," he said. "All right, men."

He  left, and in  two minutes, scarcely  more, the  grid was gone,  and the
voice above  signified a  back-to-normal. The noise of  the crowd, suddenly
released, rose high.

Arcadia said: "How ... how"

Pappa said, "Sh-h. Don't say a word. Let's better go to the ship. It should
be in the berth soon."

They  were  on the  ship.  They  had a  private  stateroom and  a table  to
themselves in the dining  room. Two light-years already separated them from
Kalgan,   and  Arcadia   finally  dared   to  broach  the   subject  again.

She said,  "But they were  after me, Mr. Palver, and  they must have had my
description and all the details. Why did he let me go?"

And Pappa smiled broadly over his roast beef. "Well, Arcadia, child, it was
easy.  When  you've  been  dealing with  agents  and  buyers and  competing
co-operatives, you learn some  of the tricks. I've had twenty years or more
to learn  them in. You see, child, when  the lieutenant opened your papers,
he found  a five hundred credit bill inside,  folded up small. Simple, no?"

"Ill pay you back Honest, I've got lots of money."

"Well," Pappa's broad face  broke into an embarrassed smile, as he waved it
away. "For a country-woman"

Arcadia  desisted. "But  what  if he'd  taken the  money  and turned  me in
anyway. And accused me of bribery."

"And give up five  hundred credits? I know these people better than you do,
girl."

But Arcadia knew  that he did not know people better. Not  these people. In
her bed that night,  she considered carefully, and knew that no bribe would
have stopped a police  lieutenant in the matter of catching her unless that
had been planned. They  didn't want to catch her, yet had made every motion
of doing so, nevertheless.

Why?  To  make  sure  she  left?  And  for  Trantor? Were  the  obtuse  and
soft-hearted couple  she was with now only a pair of  tools in the hands of
the Second Foundation, as helpless as she herself?

They must be!

Or were they?

It was all so useless. How could she fight them. Whatever she did, it might
only   be   what   those   terrible   omnipotents   wanted   her   to   do.

Yet she had to outwit them. Had to. Had to! Had to!!

                                     16

                              Beginning of War

For reason  or reasons unknown to members of the Galaxy  at the time of the
era under  discussion, Intergalactic Standard Time  defines its fundamental
unit, the  second, as the  time in which light  travels 299,776 kilometers.
86,400 seconds are arbitrarily set equal to one Intergalactic Standard Day;
and   365   of   these   days   to   one   Intergalactic   Standard   Year.

Why 299,776? Or 86,400? Or 365?

Tradition, says the historian, begging the question. Because of certain and
various  mysterious  numerical relationships,  say  the mystics,  cultists,
numerologists, metaphysicists. Because the original home-planet of humanity
had  certain natural periods  of rotation  and revolution from  which those
relationships could be derived, say a very few.

No one really knew.

Nevertheless, the  date on which the  Foundation cruiser, the  Hober Mallow
met the  Kalganian squadron, headed by the Fearless,  and, upon refusing to
allow a  search party  to board, was  blasted into smoldering  wreckage was
185; 11692 G.E.  That is, it was the 185th day of  the 11,692nd year of the
Galactic Era  which dated  from the accession  of the first  Emperor of the
traditional Kamble  dynasty. It  was also 185;  419 A.S.   dating from the
birth of  Seldon  or 185; 348 Y.F.  dating  from the establishment of the
Foundation. On  Kalgan it was 185; 56 F.C.   dating from the establishment
of  the  First Citizenship  by  the  Mule. In  each  case,  of course,  for
convenience,  the year  was so  arranged as  to yield  the same  day number
regardless of the actual day upon which the era began.

And, in  addition, to all the millions of worlds  of the Galaxy, there were
millions  of local  times,  based on  the motions  of their  own particular
heavenly neighbors.

But whichever you choose: 185; 11692-419-348-56  or anything  it was this
day which  historians later pointed to when they spoke  of the start of the
Stettinian war.

Yet to  Dr. Darell, it  was none of these  at all. It was  simply and quite
precisely  the   thirty-second  day   since  Arcadia  had   left  Terminus.

What  it cost  Darell  to maintain  stolidity  through these  days was  not
obvious to everyone.

But Elvett  Semic thought  he could guess.  He was an  old man  and fond of
saying  that his  neuronic  sheaths had  calcified to  the point  where his
thinking processes were stiff  and unwieldy. He invited and almost welcomed
the universal underestimation of  his decaying powers by being the first to
laugh at them. But  his eyes were none the less seeing for being faded; his
mind  none  the less  experienced  and  wise, for  being  no longer  agile.

He merely  twisted his pinched lips  and said, "Why don't  you do something
about it?"

The sound  was a  physical jar to  Darell, under which he  winced. He said,
gruffly, "Where were we?"

Semic regarded  him with grave  eyes. "You'd better do  something about the
girl." His sparse, yellow teeth showed in a mouth that was open in inquiry.

But  Darell replied  coldly, "The  question is:  Can you get  a Symes-Molff
Resonator in the range required?"

Well, I said I could and you weren't listening"

"I'm  sorry, Elvett.  It's  like this.  What we're  doing  now can  be more
important to everyone in the Galaxy than the question of whether Arcadia is
safe. At  least, to everyone but Arcadia and myself,  and I'm willing to go
along   with   the   majority.   How   big   would   the   Resonator   be?"

Semic looked  doubtful, "I  don't know. You  can find it  somewheres in the
catalogues."

"About how big. A ton? A pound? A block long?"

"Oh, I  thought you meant exactly. It's a  little jigger." He indicated the
first joint of his thumb. "About that."

"All right, can you do something like this?" He sketched rapidly on the pad
he held in his lap, then passed it over to the old physicist, who peered at
it doubtfully, then chuckled.

"Y'know, the brain gets calcified when you get as old as I am. What are you
trying to do?"

Darell hesitated.  He longed  desperately, at the moment,  for the physical
knowledge locked in the  other's brain, so that he need not put his thought
into   words.   But   the   longing   was  useless,   and   he   explained.

Semic was shaking his  head. "You'd need hyper-relays. The only things that
would work fast enough. A thundering lot of them."

"But it can be built?"

"Well, sure."

"Can you  get all the parts? I mean, without  causing comment? In line with
your general work."

Semic lifted  his upper lip. "Can't get  fifty hyper-relays? I wouldn't use
that many in my whole life."

"We're on  a defense  project, now. Can't  you think of  something harmless
that would use them? We've got the money."

"Hm-m-m. Maybe I can think of something."

"How small can you make the whole gadget?"

"Hyper-relays can  be had micro-size  ... wiring ... tubes   Space, you've
got a few hundred circuits there."

"I know. How big?"

Semic indicated with his hands.

"Too   big,"  said   Darell.  "I've   got  to   swing  it  from   my  belt"

Slowly, he was crumpling  his sketch into a tight ball. When it was a hard,
yellow grape, he dropped it into the ash tray and it was gone with the tiny
white flare of molecular decomposition.

He said, "Who's at your door?"

Semic  leaned over  his  desk to  the little  milky  screen above  the door
signal.  He  said,  "The  young fellow,  Anthor.  Someone  with him,  too."

Darell scraped  his chair back.  "Nothing about this, Semic,  to the others
yet. It's deadly  knowledge, if they find out, and  two lives are enough to
risk."

Pelleas Anthor  was a pulsing vortex of  activity in Semic's office, which,
somehow, managed to partake  of the age of its occupant. In the slow turgor
of  the quiet  room, the  loose, summery  sleeves of Anthor's  tunic seemed
still a-quiver with the outer breezes.

He said, "Dr. Darell, Dr. Semic  Orum Dirige."

The other  man was  tall. A long  straight nose that  lent his  thin face a
saturnine appearance. Dr. Darell held out a hand.

Anthor  smiled slightly.  "Police Lieutenant  Dirige," he  amplified. Then,
significantly, "Of Kalgan."

And Darell turned to  stare with force at the young man. "Police Lieutenant
Dirige of Kalgan," he  repeated, distinctly. "And you bring him here. Why?"

"Because he  was the last man  on Kalgan to see  your daughter. Hold, man."

Anthor's look  of triumph was suddenly  one of concern, and  he was between
the  two, struggling  violently  with Darell.  Slowly, and  not  gently, he
forced the older man back into the chair.

"What are  you trying to do?" Anthor brushed a lock  of brown hair from his
forehead,  tossed   a  hip  lightly  upon  the   desk,  and  swung  a  leg,
thoughtfully. "I thought I was bringing you good news."

Darell addressed the policeman  directly, "What does he mean by calling you
the  last man  to  see my  daughter? Is  my daughter  dead? Please  tell me
without   preliminary."    His   face   was    white   with   apprehension.

Lieutenant  Dirige said  expressionlessly,  "Last man  on Kalgan'  was the
phrase.  She's  not  on  Kalgan  now.  I  have  no  knowledge  past  that."

"Here," broke in Anthor, "let me put it straight. Sorry if I overplayed the
drama a bit, Doc. You're so inhuman about this, I forget you have feelings.
In the first place,  Lieutenant Dirige is one of us. He was born on Kalgan,
but his  father was a Foundation man brought to  that planet in the service
of  the Mule.  I  answer for  the lieutenant's  loyalty to  the Foundation.

"Now I  was in  touch with him the  day after we stopped  getting the daily
report from Munn"

"Why?" broke  in Darell, fiercely. "I thought it  was quite decided that we
were not  to make  a move in the  matter. You were risking  their lives and
ours."

"Because," was the equally  fierce retort, "I've been involved in this game
for longer than you.  Because I know of certain contacts on Kalgan of which
you know nothing. Because  I act from deeper knowledge, do you understand?"

"I think you're completely mad."

"Will you listen?"

A pause, and Darell's eyes dropped.

Anthor's lips  quirked into  a half smile,  "All right, Doc. Give  me a few
minutes. Tell him, Dirige."

Dirige spoke  easily: "As  far as I  know, Dr. Darell, your  daughter is at
Trantor. At  least, she had a  ticket to Trantor at  the Eastern Spaceport.
She was with a  Trading Representative from that planet who claimed she was
his niece.  Your daughter  seems to have  a queer collection  of relatives,
doctor. That was the second uncle she had in a period of two weeks, eh? The
Trantorian even  tried to  bribe me   probably thinks that's  why they got
away." He smiled grimly at the thought.

"How was she?"

"Unharmed, as  far as I could see. Frightened. I  don't blame her for that.
The   whole  department   was  after   her.  I   still  don't   know  why."

Darell drew a breath  for what seemed the first time in several minutes. He
was conscious  of the  trembling of his  hands and controlled  them with an
effort. "Then she's all  right. This Trading Representative, who was he? Go
back to him. What part does he play in it?"

"I don't know. Do you know anything about Trantor?"

"I lived there once."

"It's an agricultural world, now. Exports animal fodder and grains, mostly.
High quality! They sell  them all over the Galaxy. There are a dozen or two
farm co-operatives on the planet and each has its representatives overseas.
Shrewd sons  of guns,  too I knew  this one's record. He'd  been on Kalgan
before,  usually  with his  wife.  Perfectly  honest. Perfectly  harmless."

"Um-m-m,"  said Anthor.  "Arcadia was  born in  Trantor, wasn't  she, Doc?"

Darell nodded.

"It hangs together, you  see. She wanted to go away  quickly and far  and
Trantor would suggest itself. Don't you think so?"

Darell said: "Why not back here?"

"Perhaps she was being pursued and felt that she had to double off in a new
angle, eh?'

Dr. Darell  lacked the  heart to question  further. Well, then,  let her be
safe  on Trantor,  or as  safe as one  could be  anywhere in this  dark and
horrible Galaxy.  He groped toward  the door, felt Anthor's  light touch on
his sleeve, and stopped, but did not turn.

"Mind if I go home with you, Doc?"

"You're welcome," was the automatic response.

By evening, the exteriormost  reaches of Dr. Darell's personality, the ones
that made immediate contact  with other people had solidified once more. He
had  refused  to eat  his  evening  meal and  had,  instead, with  feverish
insistence, returned to the inchwise advance into the intricate mathematics
of encephalographic analysis.

It was  not till  nearly midnight, that  he entered the  living room again.

Pelleas Anthor was still there, twiddling at the controls of the video. The
footsteps   behind   him  caused   him   to  glance   over  his   shoulder.

"Hi. Aren't  you in bed yet? I've been spending  hours on the video, trying
to get  something other than bulletins.  It seems the  F.S. Hober Mallow is
delayed in course and hasn't been heard from"

"Really? What do they suspect?"

"What do you think? Kalganian skulduggery. There are reports that Kalganian
vessels were sighted in  the general space sector in which the Hober Mallow
was last heard from?"

Darell   shrugged,    and   Anthor   rubbed    his   forehead   doubtfully.

"Look doc," he said, "why don't you go to Trantor?"

"Why should I?"

"Because "You're no good to us here. You're not yourself. You can't be. And
you could  accomplish a purpose by going to  Trantor, too. The old Imperial
Library  with  the  complete  records  of  the Proceedings  of  the  Seldon
Commission are there"

"No!  The Library  has  been picked  clean  and it  hasn't helped  anyone."

"It helped Ebling Mis once."

"How  do you  know? Yes, he  said  he found  the Second Foundation,  and my
mother  killed him  five seconds  later as  the only  way to keep  him from
unwittingly revealing its location  to the Mule. But in doing so, she also,
you realize,  made it impossible ever  to tell whether Mis  really did know
the location. After all, no one else has ever been able to deduce the truth
from those records."

"Ebling Mis,  if you'll remember, was working  under the driving impetus of
the Mule's mind."

"I know  that, too, but  Mis' mind was, by that  very token, in an abnormal
state. Do you and  I know anything about the properties of a mind under the
emotional control of another;  about its abilities and shortcomings? In any
case, I will not go to Trantor."

Anthor frowned, "Well, why  the vehemence? I merely suggested it as  well,
by  Space,  I  don't  understand you.  You  look  ten  years older.  You're
obviously having  a hellish time of it. You're  not doing anything of value
here. If I were you, I'd go and get the girl."

"Exactly! It's  what I  want to do,  too. That's  why I won't do  it. Look,
Anthor, and  try to understand. You're playing   we're both playing  with
something completely beyond our powers to fight. In cold blood, if you have
any, you know that,  whatever you may think in your moments of quixoticism.

"For  fifty years,  we've  known that  the  Second Foundation  is the  real
descendent  and pupil of  Seldonian mathematics.  What that means,  and you
know that, too, is that nothing in the Galaxy happens which does not play a
part in  their reckoning. To us,  all life is a  series of accidents, to be
met with by improvisations To them, all life is purposive and should be met
by precalculation.

"But they have their  weakness. Their work is statistical and only the mass
action  of humanity  is truly  inevitable. Now  how  I play  a part,  as an
individual, in the foreseen course of history, I don't know. Perhaps I have
no definite  part, since  the Plan leaves individuals  to indeterminacy and
free will.  But I  am important and  they   they, you understand   may at
least have calculated my  probable reaction. So I distrust, my impulses, my
desires, my probable reactions.

"I would rather present them with an improbable reaction. I will stay here,
despite the  fact that  I yearn very  desperately to leave. "No!  Because I
yearn very desperately to leave."

The younger  man smiled  sourly. "You don't know  your own mind as  well as
they  might. Suppose  that   knowing you   they  might count on  what you
think,  merely  think,  is the  improbable reaction,  simply by  knowing in
advance what your line of reasoning would be."

"In that  case, there is no escape. For if I  follow the reasoning you have
just outlined and go to Trantor, they may have foreseen that, too. There is
an endless cycle of  double-double-double-double-crosses. No matter how far
I follow  that cycle,  I can only either  go or stay. The  intricate act of
luring my  daughter halfway  across the Galaxy  cannot be meant  to make me
stay where I am,  since I would most certainly have stayed if they had done
nothing.  It   can  only  be  to  make  me  move,   and  so  I  will  stay.

"And  besides,  Anthor,  not  everything bears  the  breath  of the  Second
Foundation; not  all events  are the results  of their puppeting.  They may
have had nothing to  do with Arcadia's leave-taking, and she may be safe on
Trantor when all the rest of us are dead."

"No," said Anthor, sharply, "now you are off the track."

"You have an alternative interpretation?"

"I have  if youll listen."

"Oh, go ahead. I don't lack patience."

"Well, then  how well do you know your own daughter?"

"How well  can any  individual know any  other? Obviously, my  knowledge is
inadequate."

"So is  mine on that basis,  perhaps even more so   but at least, I viewed
her with fresh eyes. Item one: She is a ferocious little romantic, the only
child of an ivory-tower academician, growing up in an unreal world of video
and book-film  adventure. She lives in  a weird self-constructed fantasy of
espionage and  intrigue. Item two: She's  intelligent about it; intelligent
enough to  outwit us,  at any rate.  She planned carefully  to overhear our
first conference and succeeded.  She planned carefully to go to Kalgan with
Munn  and succeeded.  Item  three: She  has an  unholy hero-worship  of her
grandmother  your mother  who defeated the Mule.

"I'm right so far, I think? All right, then. Now, unlike you, I've received
a complete  report from Lieutenant  Dirige and, in addition,  my sources of
information on Kalgan are  rather complete, and all sources check. We know,
for instance,  that Homir Munn, in  conference with the Lord  of Kalgan was
refused admission to the  Mule's Palace, and that this refusal was suddenly
abrogated after Arcadia had spoken to Lady Callia, the First Citizen's very
good friend."

Darell interrupted. "And how do you know all this?"

"For  one thing,  Munn  was interviewed  by Dirige  as  part of  the police
campaign to locate Arcadia. Naturally, we have a complete transcript of the
questions and answers.

"And take  Lady Callia herself. It  is rumored that she  has lost Stettin's
interest,  but the  rumor isn't borne  out by  facts. She not  only remains
unreplaced; is not only  able to mediate the lord's refusal to Munn into an
acceptance; but can even  engineer Arcadia's escape openly. Why, a dozen of
the  soldiers about  Stettin's executive  mansion testified that  they were
seen together on the last evening. Yet she remains unpunished. This despite
the fact that Arcadia was searched for with every appearance of diligence."

"But  what is  your conclusion  from all  this torrent  of ill-connection?"

"That Arcadia's escape was arranged."

"As I said."

"With this  addition. That  Arcadia must have  known it was  arranged; that
Arcadia, the bright little girl who saw cabals everywhere, saw this one and
followed  your own  type of  reasoning. They  wanted her  to return  to the
Foundation,  and  so  she  went  to  Trantor, instead.  But  why  Trantor?"

"Well, why?"

"Because that  is where Bayta, her  idolized grandmother, escaped when  she
was  in  flight. Consciously  or  unconsciously, Arcadia  imitated that.  I
wonder, then, if Arcadia was fleeing the same enemy."

"The Mule?" asked Darell with polite sarcasm.

"Of course not. I mean, by the enemy, a mentality that she could not fight.
She was  running from the  Second Foundation, or such  influence thereof as
could be found on Kalgan."

"What influence is this you speak of?"

"Do you  expect Kalgan  to be immune  from that ubiquitous  menace? We both
have come  to the conclusion, somehow,  that Arcadia's escape was arranged.
Right? She  was searched  for and found,  but deliberately allowed  to slip
away by Dirige. By  Dirige, do you understand? But how was that? Because he
was our man. But  how did they know that? Were they counting on him to be a
traitor? Eh, doc?"

"Now  you're saying  that they  honestly meant  to recapture  her. Frankly,
you're tiring  me a  bit, Anthor. Finish  your say; I  want to  go to bed."

"My  say  is  quickly  finished."  Anthor  reached  for a  small  group  of
photo-records in  his inner  pocket. It was  the familiar wigglings  of the
encephalograph. "Dirige's brainwaves,"  Anthor said, casually, "taken since
he returned."

It was  quite visible to Darell's naked eye, and his  face was gray when he
looked up. "He is Controlled."

"Exactly.  He allowed  Arcadia to  escape not  because he  was our  man but
because he was the Second Foundation's."

"Even  after  he knew  she  was going  to  Trantor, and  not to  Terminus."

Anthor shrugged.  "He had been geared  to let her go.  There was no way  he
could modify  that. He was only  a tool, you see.  It was just that Arcadia
followed the least probable  course, and is probably safe. Or at least safe
until such time as  the Second Foundation can modify the plans to take into
account this changed state of affairs"

He paused.  The little  signal light on  the video set was  flashing. On an
independent circuit,  it signified  the presence of  emergency news. Darell
saw it,  too, and with the mechanical movement of  long habit turned on the
video.  They  broke  in  upon the  middle  of  a  sentence  but before  its
completion, they knew that the Hober Mallow, or the wreck thereof, had been
found and that, for the first time in nearly half a century, the Foundation
was again at war.

Anthor's  jaw was  set in  a hard  line. "All  right, doc, you  heard that.
Kalgan  has  attacked;  and  Kalgan is  under  the  control  of the  Second
Foundation.  Will you  follow your  daughter's lead  and move  to Trantor?"

"No. I will risk it. Here."

"Dr. Darell. You are  not as intelligent as your daughter. I wonder how far
you can  be trusted."  His long level  stare held Darell for  a moment, and
then without a word, he left.

And   Darell   was  left   in   uncertainty   and     almost     despair.

Unheeded, the video was a medley of excited sight-sound, as it described in
nervous detail the first hour of the war between Kalgan and the Foundation.

                                     17

                                    War

The mayor  of the Foundation brushed  futilely at the picket  fence of hair
that  rimmed his  skull. He  sighed. "The  years that  we have  wasted; the
chances we  have thrown away. I make no  recriminations, Dr. Darell, but we
deserve defeat."

Darell said,  quietly, "I see no  reason for lack of  confidence in events,
sir."

"Lack of confidence! Lack of confidence! By the Galaxy, Dr. Darell, on what
would you base any other attitude? Come here"

He half-led  half-forced Darell toward the  limpid ovoid cradled gracefully
on its tiny force-field  support. At a touch of the mayor's hand, it glowed
within  an accurate three-dimensional model of the Galactic double-spiral.

"In yellow," said the mayor, excitedly, "we have that region of Space under
Foundation control; in red, that under Kalgan."

What Darell  saw was  a crimson sphere  resting within a  stretching yellow
fist  that surrounded it  on all sides  but that  toward the center  of the
Galaxy.

"Galactography," said the mayor,  "is our greatest enemy. Our admirals make
no secret  of our  almost hopeless, strategic position.  Observe. The enemy
has inner  lines of communication. He  is concentrated; can meet  us on all
sides  with  equal  ease.   He  can  defend  himself  with  minimum  force.

"We are expanded. The average distance between inhabited systems within the
Foundation is nearly three times that within Kalgan. To go from Santanni to
Locris, for  instance, is a  voyage of twenty-five hundred  parsecs for us,
but only eight hundred parsecs for them, if we remain within our respective
territories"

Darell said, "I understand all that, sir."

"And you do not understand that it may mean defeat."

"There is  more than  distance to war.  I say we  cannot lose.  It is quite
impossible."

"And why do you say that?"

"Because of my own interpretation of the Seldon Plan."

"Oh," the  mayor's lips twisted, and the hands  behind his back flapped one
within the  other, "then you rely, too, on the  mystical help of the Second
Foundation."

"No. Merely on the help of inevitability  and of courage and persistence."

And yet behind his easy confidence, he wondered

What if

Well  What if  Anthor were  right, and  Kalgan were  a direct tool  of the
mental  wizards. What  if it was  their purpose  to defeat and  destroy the
Foundation. No! It made no sense!

And yet

He  smiled  bitterly. Always  the  same.  Always that  peering and  peering
through  the  opaque  granite  which, to  the  enemy,  was so  transparent.

Nor were  the galactographic  verities of the situation  lost upon Stettin.

The  Lord of Kalgan  stood before a  twin of  the Galactic model  which the
mayor  and  Darell had  inspected.  Except  that where  the mayor  frowned,
Stettin smiled.

His  admiral's uniform  glistered imposingly  upon his massive  figure. The
crimson  sash of  the Order  of the  Mule awarded  him by the  former First
Citizen whom six months  later he had replaced somewhat forcefully, spanned
his chest  diagonally from  right shoulder to  waist. The Silver  Star with
Double  Comets  and Swords  sparkled  brilliantly upon  his left  shoulder.

He addressed the six men of his general staff whose uniforms were only less
grandiloquent than his own, and his First Minister as well, thin and gray 
a darkling cobweb, lost in the brightness.

Stettin said,  "I think the decisions are clear. We  can afford to wait. To
them,  every day of  delay will be  another blow  at their morale.  If they
attempt to defend all portions of their realm, they will be spread thin and
we  can strike  through  in two  simultaneous  thrusts here  and here."  He
indicated the  directions on the Galactic model   two lances of pure white
shooting through  the yellow  fist from the  red ball it  inclosed, cutting
Terminus off on either side in a tight arc. "In such a manner, we cut their
fleet  into  three  parts   which  can  be  defeated  in  detail.  If  they
concentrate,  they give  up two-thirds  of their dominions  voluntarily and
will probably risk rebellion."

The  First  Minister's  thin  voice  alone  seeped through  the  hush  that
followed. "In  six months," he  said, "the Foundation will  grow six months
stronger.  Their resources  are  greater, as  we  all know,  their navy  is
numerically stronger; their manpower  is virtually inexhaustible. Perhaps a
quick thrust would be safer."

His was easily the least influential voice in the room. Lord Stettin smiled
and made  a flat  gesture with his  hand. "The six  months  or  a year, if
necessary  will cost us nothing. The men of the Foundation cannot prepare;
they are  ideologically incapable of it. It is  in their very philosophy to
believe that the Second  Foundation will save them. But not this time, eh?"

The men in the room stirred uneasily.

"You lack confidence, I  believe," said Stettin, frigidly. "Is it necessary
once again  to describe the reports of  our agents in Foundation territory,
or to  repeat the findings of  Mr. Homir Munn, the  Foundation agent now in
our ... uh ... service? Let us adjourn, gentlemen."

Stettin returned  to his private chambers  with a fixed smile  still on his
face.  He sometimes wondered  about this  Homir Munn. A  queer water-spined
fellow who certainly did not bear out his early promise. And yet he crawled
with interesting information that carried conviction with it  particularly
when Callia was present.

His smile  broadened. That fat fool had her uses,  after all. At least, she
got  more with  her  wheedling out  of Munn  than he  could, and  with less
trouble. Why  not give her to Munn? He frowned.  Callia. She and her stupid
jealousy. Space! If he  still had the Darell girl- Why hadn't he ground her
skull to powder for that?

He couldn't quite put his finger on the reason.

Maybe because she got along with Munn. And he needed Munn. It was Munn, for
instance, who  had demonstrated that, at  least in the belief  of the Mule,
there  was  no  Second  Foundation.  His admirals  needed  that  assurance.

He would have liked to make the proofs public, but it was better to let the
Foundation believe  in their  nonexistent help. Was it  actually Callia who
had pointed that out? That's right. She had said

Oh, nonsense! She couldn't have said anything.

And yet

He shook his head to clear it and passed on.

                                     18

                              Ghost of a World

Trantor was  a world  in dregs and rebirth.  Set like a faded  jewel in the
midst of the bewildering crowd of suns at the center of the Galaxy  in the
heaps  and clusters  of  stars piled  high  with aimless  prodigality   it
alternately dreamed of past and future.

Time had  been when the insubstantial ribbons  of control had stretched out
from its  metal coating to the very edges of stardom.  It had been a single
city, housing  four hundred  billion administrators; the  mightiest capital
that had ever been.

Until the  decay of the Empire eventually reached it  and in the Great Sack
of a  century ago, its drooping  powers had been bent  back upon themselves
and broken  forever. In  the blasting ruin  of death, the  metal shell that
circled the  planet wrinkled  and crumpled into  an aching mock  of its own
grandeur.

The survivors  tore up the metal  plating and sold it  to other planets for
seed and  cattle. The soil was uncovered once  more and the planet returned
to  its beginnings.  In the  spreading areas  of primitive  agriculture, it
forgot its intricate and colossal past.

Or would  have but  for the still  mighty shards that  heaped their massive
ruins toward the sky in bitter and dignified silence.

Arcadia watched the metal  rim of the horizon with a stirring of the heart.
The village in which  the Palvers lived was but a huddle of houses to her 
small  and primitive.  The  fields that  surrounded it  were golden-yellow,
wheat-cIogged tracts.

But there,  just past the reaching point was the  memory of the past, still
glowing  in unrusted  splendor,  and burning  with  fire where  the sun  of
Trantor caught  it in gleaming  highlights. She had been  there once during
the  months since  she had  arrived at  Trantor. She  had climbed  onto the
smooth,  unjointed  pavement and  ventured  into  the silent  dust-streaked
structures, where  the light entered  through the jags of  broken walls and
partitions.

It had been solidified heartache. It had been blasphemy.

She had  left, clangingly  running until her  feet pounded softly on earth
once more.

And then  she could  only look back  longingly. She dared  not disturb that
mighty brooding once more.

Somewhere  on this  world,  she knew,  she had  been  born   near  the old
Imperial  Library, which  was the  veriest Trantor  of Trantor. It  was the
sacred of  the sacred; the holy  of holies! Of all  the world, it alone had
survived  the Great  Sack and for  a century  it had remained  complete and
untouched; defiant of the universe.

There Hari  Seldon and  his group had  woven their unimaginable  web. There
Ebling Mis  pierced the secret, and sat numbed  in his vast surprise, until
he was killed to prevent the secret from going further.

There at  the Imperial Library,  her grandparents had lived  for ten years,
until  the Mule  died,  and they  could  return to  the reborn  Foundation.

There at  the Imperial Library, her  own father returned with  his bride to
find the Second Foundation once again, but failed. There, she had been born
and there her mother had died.

She would have liked to visit the Library, but Preem Palver shook his round
head. "It's  thousands of  miles, Arkady, and  there's so much  to do here.
Besides,  it's  not  good  to  bother  there.  You know;  it's  a  shrine"

But Arcadia knew that  he had no desire to visit the Library; that it was a
case of the Mule's  Palace over again. There was this superstitious fear on
the part of the  pygmies of the present for the relies of the giants of the
past.

Yet it  would have been horrible to feel a  grudge against the funny little
man for  that. She had been  on Trantor now for  nearly three months and in
all that  time, he and she   Pappa and Mamma   had been wonderful to her

And what  was her return? Why, to involve them in  the common ruin. Had she
warned them that she  was marked for destruction, perhaps? No! She let them
assume the deadly role of protectors.

Her   conscience   panged   unbearably     yet   what   choice  had   she?

She stepped  reluctantly down  the stairs to breakfast.  The voices reached
her.

Preem Palver  had tucked the napkin  down his shirt collar  with a twist of
his plump  neck and  had reached for  his poached eggs  with an uninhibited
satisfaction.

"I was  down in the city yesterday, Mamma," he  said, wielding his fork and
nearly drowning the words with a capacious mouthful.

"And what  is down in the city,  Pappa?" asked Mamma indifferently, sitting
down,  looking sharply  about  the table,  and rising  again for  the salt.

"Ah, not  so good. A ship came in from  out Kalgan-way with newspapers from
there. It's war there."

"War!  So! Well, let  them break their  heads, if  they have no  more sense
inside. Did your pay check come yet? Pappa, I'm telling you again. You warn
old  man Cosker  this isn't  the only  cooperative in  the world.  It's bad
enough they  pay you what I'm  ashamed to tell my  friends, but at least on
time they could be!"

"Time; shmime,"  said Pappa, irritably. "Look, don't  make me silly talk at
breakfast,  it should  choke me each  bite in  the throat," and  he wreaked
havoc  among the  buttered toast  as he  said it.  He added,  somewhat more
moderately, "The fighting is between Kalgan and the Foundation, and for two
months, they've been at it."

His hands  lunged at one  another in mock-representation of  a space fight.

"Um-m-m. And what's doing?"

"Bad  for the  Foundation. Well,  you saw  Kalgan; all soldiers.  They were
ready. The Foundation was not, and so  poof!"

And   suddenly,   Mamma   laid   down   her  fork   and   hissed,   "Fool!"

"Huh?"

"Dumb-head!   Your    big   mouth   is   always    moving   and   wagging."

She was pointing quickly and when Pappa looked over his shoulder, there was
Arcadia, frozen in the doorway.

She said, "The Foundation is at war?"

Pappa looked helplessly at Mamma, then nodded.

"And they're losing?"

Again the nod.

Arcadia felt the unbearable  catch in her throat, and slowly approached the
table. "Is it over?" she whispered.

"Over?" repeated  Pappa, with false  heartiness. "Who said it  was over? In
war, lots of things can happen. And ... and"

"Sit  down, darling," said  Mamma, soothingly.  "No one should  talk before
breakfast. You're not in  a healthy condition with no food in the stomach."

But   Arcadia   ignored   her.    "Are   the   Kalganians   on   Terminus?"

"No," said  Pappa, seriously. "The news is from  last week, and Terminus is
still fighting.  This is honest. I'm telling  the truth. And the Foundation
is   still  strong.   Do  you   want  me   to  get  you   the  newspapers?"

"Yes!"

She read them over what she could eat of her breakfast and her eyes blurred
as she read. Santanni and Korell were gone  without a fight. A squadron of
the Foundation's  navy had been trapped  in the sparsely-sunned Ifni sector
and wiped out to almost the last ship.

And now  the Foundation  was back to  the Four-Kingdom core   the original
Realm which  had been  built up under  Salvor Hardin, the  first mayor. But
still it fought   and still there might be a chance-and whatever happened,
she  must inform  her father.  She must  somehow reach  his ear. She  must!

But how? With a war in the way.

She asked Pappa after  breakfast, "Are you going out on a new mission soon,
Mr. Palver?"

Pappa  was on the  large chair on  the front  lawn, sunning himself.  A fat
cigar smoldered  between his  plump fingers and  he looked like  a beatific
pug-dog.

"A mission?"  he repeated, lazily. "Who knows? It's  a nice vacation and my
leave  isn't up.  Why talk  about new  missions? You're  restless, Arkady?"

"Me? No,  I like  it here. You're  very good to  me, you  and Mrs. Palver."

He waved his hand at her, brushing away her words.

Arcadia said, "I was thinking about the war."

"But don't  think about  it. What can  you do? If it's  something you can't
help, why hurt yourself over it?"

"But  I was  thinking  that the  Foundation has  lost  most of  its farming
worlds. They're probably rationing food there."

Pappa   looked  uncomfortable.   "Don't   worry.  It'll   be  all   right."

She scarcely listened. "I wish I could carry food to them, that's what. You
know after  the Mule died,  and the Foundation rebelled,  Terminus was just
about isolated for a  time and General Han Pritcher, who succeeded the Mule
for a  while was  laying siege to it.  Food was running awfully  low and my
father  says that  his father told  him that  they only had  dry amino-acid
concentrates that  tasted terrible. Why, one  egg cost two hundred credits.
And then they broke the siege just in time and food ships came through from
Santanni.  It must  have been  an awful  time. Probably it's  happening all
over, now."

There  was  a  pause,  and then  Arcadia  said,  "You  know,  I'll bet  the
Foundation would  be willing to pay smuggler's  prices for food now. Double
and  triple and  more.  Gee, if  any  co-operative, f'r  instance, here  on
Trantor took over the job, they might lose some ships, but, I'll bet they'd
be war  millionaires before it was over. The  Foundation Traders in the old
days  used to  do  that all  the time.  There'd  be a  war, so  they'd sell
whatever was needed bad and take their chances. Golly, they used to make as
much as two million  dollars out of one trip  profit. That was just out of
what they could carry on one ship, too."

Pappa stirred.  His cigar had gone  out, unnoticed. "A deal  for food, huh?
Hm-m-m But the Foundation is so far away."

"Oh, I  know. I guess you  couldn't do it from here.  If you took a regular
liner you  probably couldn't get closer than  Massena or Smushyk, and after
that you'd have to  hire a small scoutship or something to slip you through
the lines."

Pappa's hand brushed at his hair, as he calculated.

Two weeks later, arrangements  for the mission were completed. Mamma railed
for  most of  the time  First, at  the incurable  obstinacy with  which he
courted suicide. Then, at the incredible obstinacy with which he refused to
allow her to accompany him.

Pappa said, "Mamma, why do you act like an old lady. I can't take you. It's
a  man's   work.  What  do  you  think  a   war  is?  Fun?  Child's  play?"

"Then why do  you go? Are you a man, you  old fool  with a leg and half an
arm in the grave.  Let some of the young ones go  not a fat bald-head like
you?"

"I'm not  a bald-head,"  retorted Pappa, with  dignity. "I got  yet lots of
hair. And  why should it not  be me that gets  the commission? Why, a young
fellow? Listen, this could mean millions?"

She knew that and she subsided.

Arcadia saw him once before he left.

She said, "Are you going to Terminus?"

"Why not?  You say  yourself they need  bread and rice  and potatoes. Well,
I'll make a deal with them, and they'll get it."

"Well, then   just one thing:  If you're going to  Terminus, could you ...
would you see my father?"

And Pappa's  face crinkled  and seemed to  melt into sympathy, "Oh   and I
have to wait  for you to tell me. Sure, I'll see  him. I'll tell him you're
safe and everything's O.K., and when the war is over, I'll bring you back."

"Thanks. I'll tell you how to find him. His name is Dr. Toran Darell and he
lives in  Stanmark. That's  just outside Terminus  City, and you  can get a
little  commuting  plane  that  goes there.  Were  at  55 Channel  Drive."

"Wait, and Ill write it down."

"No, no,"  Arcadia's arm  shot out. "You  mustn't write anything  down. You
must remember  and find him without anybody's help."

Pappa  looked puzzled. Then  he shrugged  his shoulders. "All  right, then.
It's 55  Channel Drive in Stanmark, outside  Terminus City, and you commute
there by plane. All right?"

"One other thing."

"Yes?"

"Would you tell him something from me?"

"Sure."

"I want to whisper it to you."

He leaned his plump cheek toward her, and the little whispered sound passed
from one to the other.

Pappa's eyes  were round. "That's what  you want me to  say? But it doesn't
make sense."

"He'll know what you mean. Just say I sent it and that I said he would know
what it means. And you say it exactly the way I told you. No different. You
won't forget it?"

"How can I forget it? Five little words. Look"

"No, no."  She hopped up and down in the  intensity of her feelings. "Don't
repeat it. Don't ever repeat it to anyone. Forget all about it except to my
father. Promise me."

Pappa shrugged again. "I promise! All right!"

"All right," she said, mournfully, and as he passed down the drive to where
the air  taxi waited to take him to the spaceport,  she wondered if she had
signed his  death warrant.  She wondered if  she would ever  see him again.

She  scarcely dared to  walk into the  house again  to face the  good, kind
Mamma. Maybe when it was all over, she had better kill herself for what she
had done to them.

                                     19

                                 End of War

QUORISTON, BATTLE  OF Fought on  9, 17, 377 F.E.  between the forces of the
Foundation and  those of Lord Stettin of Kalgan, it  was the last battle of
consequence during the Interregnum ....

ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA

Jole Turbor,  in his new role of war  correspondent, found his bulk incased
in a naval uniform,  and rather liked it. He enjoyed being back on the air,
and some of the  fierce helplessness of the futile fight against the Second
Foundation  left  him in  the  excitement  of another  sort  of fight  with
substantial ships and ordinary men.

To be  sure, the Foundation's fight had  not been remarkable for victories,
but it  was still  possible to be  philosophic about the  matter. After six
months, the hard core of the Foundation was untouched, and the hard core of
the Fleet was still in being. With the new additions since the start of the
war, it  was almost  as strong numerically, and  stronger technically, than
before the defeat at Ifni.

And meanwhile, planetary defenses were being strengthened; the armed forces
better  trained; administrative  efficiency  was having  some of  the water
squeezed out of it  and much of the Kalganian's conquering fleet was being
wallowed down through the necessity of occupying the "conquered" territory.

At the moment, Turbor  was with the Third Fleet in the outer reaches of the
Anacreonian sector. In line  with his policy of making this a "little man's
war," he  was interviewing Fennel Leemor,  Engineer Third Class, volunteer.

"Tell us a little about yourself, sailor," said Turbor.

"Ain't much to tell," Leemor shuffled his feet and allowed a faint, bashful
smile  to cover  his face,  as though  he could  see all the  millions that
undoubtedly could  see him  at the moment. Im  a Locrian. Got a  job in an
air-car factory; section head and good pay. I'm married; got two kids, both
girls.  Say, I  couldn't  say hello  to them,  could  I   in  case they're
listening."

"Go ahead, sailor. The video is all yours."

"Gosh, thanks."  He burbled,  "Hello, Milla, in case  you're listening, I'm
fine. Is Sunni all  right? And Tomma? I think of you all the time and maybe
I'll be back on  furlough after we get back to port. I got your food parcel
but  I'm  sending it  back.  We  get our  regular  mess, but  they say  the
civilians are a little tight. I guess that's all."

"I'll look her up  next time I'm on Locris, sailor, and make sure she's not
short of food. O.K.?"

The young  man smiled broadly and nodded his  head. "Thank you, Mr. Turbor.
Id appreciate that."

"All right.  Suppose you  tell us, then  You're a volunteer,  aren't you?"

"Sure am. If anyone  picks a fight with me, I don't have to wait for anyone
to  drag me  in.  I joined  up the  day I  heard about  the  Hober Mallow."

"That's a fine spirit.  Have you seen much action? I notice "You're wearing
two battle stars."

"Ptah."  The sailor  spat. "Those  weren't battles,  they were  chases. The
Kalganians don't  fight, unless they have odds of five  to one or better in
their favor. Even then they just edge in and try to cut us up ship by ship.
Cousin of  mine was  at Ifni and  he was on a  ship that got away,  the old
Ebling  Mis.  He says  it was  the same  there. They  had their  Main Fleet
against just  a wing division of  ours, and down to  where we only had five
ships left, they kept stalking instead of fighting. We got twice as many of
their ships at that fight."

"Then you think we're going to win the war?"

Sure bet; now that we aren't retreating. Even if things got too bad, that's
when I'd  expect the Second Foundation to step in.  We still got the Seldon
Plan  and they know it, too."

Turbor's  lips curled  a bit.  "You're counting  on the  Second Foundation,
then?"

The   answer  came   with  honest   surprise.  "Well,   doesn't  everyone?"

Junior Officer Tippellum stepped  into Turbor's room after the visicast. He
shoved  a cigarette  at the  correspondent and  knocked his  cap back  to a
perilous balance on the occiput.

"We picked up a prisoner," he said.

"Yes?"

"Little  crazy fellow.  Claims to  be a  neutral  diplomatic  immunity, no
less.  I don't  think they  know what  to do  with him. His  name's Palvro,
Palver, something like that, and he says he's from Trantor. Don't know what
in space he's doing in a war zone."

But Turbor had  swung to a sitting position on his bunk  and the nap he had
been  about  to take  was  forgotten.  He remembered  quite  well his  last
interview  with Darell,  the day  after war  had been  declared and  he was
shoving off.

"Preem Palver," he said. It was a statement.

Tippellum  paused and  let the smoke  trickle out  the sides of  his mouth.
"Yeah," he said, "how in space did you know?"

"Never mind. Can I see him?"

"Space, I  can't say. The old man has him in  his own room for questioning.
Everyone figures he's a spy."

"You tell  the old man that  I know him, if he's who  he claims he is. III
take the responsibility."

Captain Dixyl  on the flagship of the  Third Fleet watched unremittingly at
the  Grand  Detector. No  ship  could  avoid being  a  source of  subatomic
radiation  not even  if it were lying an inert mass  and each focal point
of  such radiation  was a  little sparkle  in the  three-dimensional field.

Each one  of the Foundation's ships  were accounted for and  no sparkle was
left over,  now that  the little spy who  claimed to be a  neutral had been
picked  up. For  a  while, that  outside ship  had  created a  stir  in the
captain's quarters. The tactics might have needed changing on short notice.
As it was

"Are you sure you have it?" he asked.

Commander Cenn nodded. "I will take my squadron through hyperspace: radius,
10.00 parsecs; theta, 268.52  degrees; phi, 84.15 degrees. Return to origin
at 1330. Total absence 11.83 hours."

"Right. Now we are going to count on pin-point return as regards both space
and time. Understand?"

"Yes, captain."  He looked at his  wrist watch, "My ships  will be ready by
0140."

"Good," said Captain Dixyl.

The Kalganian squadron was not within detector range now, but they would be
soon.  There was  independent  information to  that effect.  Without Cenn's
squadron the Foundation forces  would be badly outnumbered, but the captain
was quite confident. Quite confident.

Preem Palver  looked sadly  about him. First  at the tall,  skinny admiral;
then at the others,  everyone in uniform; and now at this last one, big and
stout, with  his collar open and  no tie  not like the  rest  who said he
wanted to speak to him.

Jole  Turbor was  saying: "I  am perfectly  aware, admiral, of  the serious
possibilities involved  here, but  I tell you  that if I can  be allowed to
speak  to him  for  a few  minutes, I  may  be able  to settle  the current
uncertainty."

"Is   there  any   reason   why  you   can't  question   him   before  me?"

Turbor pursed  his lips and  looked stubborn. "Admiral," he  said, "while I
have been attached to your ships, the Third Fleet has received an excellent
press.  You may  station men  outside the  door, if  you like, and  you may
return in  five minutes.  But, meanwhile, humor  me a bit,  and your public
relations will not suffer. Do you understand me?"

He did.

Then Turbor  in the  isolation that followed,  turned to Palver,  and said,
"Quickly  what is the name of the girl you abducted."

And   Palver  could   simply   stare  round-eyed,   and  shake   his  head.

"No nonsense,"  said Turbor. "If you  do not answer, you  will be a spy and
spies are blasted without trial in war time."

"Arcadia Darell!" gasped Palver.

"Well! All right, then. Is she safe?"

Palver nodded.

"You  had  better  be  sure  of  that,  or  it  won't  be  well  for  you."

"She   is  in   good   health,  perfectly   safe,"  said   Palver,  palely.

The admiral returned, "Well?"

"The man, sir, is not a spy. You may believe what he tells you. I vouch for
him."

"That  so?"  The  admiral  frowned.  "Then he  represents  an  agricultural
co-operative on Trantor that wants to make a trade treaty with Terminus for
the delivery  of grains and potatoes.  Well, all right, but  he can't leave
now."

"Why not?" asked Palver, quickly.

"Because we're in the middle of a battle. After it is over  assuming we're
still alive  we'll take you to Terminus."

The  Kalganian fleet  that  spanned through  space detected  the Foundation
ships from an incredible distance and were themselves detected. Like little
fireflies  in  each other's  Grand  Detectors,  they closed  in across  the
emptiness.

And the  Foundation's admiral  frowned and said,  "This must be  their main
push. Look  at the numbers." Then, "They won't  stand up before us, though;
not if Cenn's detachment can be counted on."

Commander Cenn had left hours before  at the first detection of the coming
enemy. There  was no way of altering the plan now.  It worked or it didn't,
but the  admiral felt  quite comfortable. As  did the officers.  As did the
men.

Again watch the fireflies.

Like  a   deadly  ballet  dance,  in   precise  formations,  they  sparked.

The  Foundation fleet edged  slowly backwards.  Hours passed and  the fleet
veered slowly  off, teasing  the advancing enemy slightly  off course, then
more so.

In  the minds  of the  dictators of  the battle  plan, there was  a certain
volume of space that must be occupied by the Kalganian ships. Out from that
volume crept the Foundationers;  into it slipped the Kalganians. Those that
passed out  again were  attacked, suddenly and fiercely.  Those that stayed
within were not touched.

It all depended on  the reluctance of the ships of Lord Stettin to take the
initiative themselves  on their willingness to remain where none attacked.

Captain Dixyl  stared frigidly at his wrist watch.  It was 1310, "We've got
twenty minutes," he said.

The  lieutenant at  his side nodded  tensely, "It  looks all right  so far,
captain. We've  got more than ninety percent of them  boxed. If we can keep
them that way"

"Yes! If"

The Foundation  ships were drifting forward again   very slowly. Not quick
enough to urge a  Kalganian retreat and just quickly enough to discourage a
Kalganian advance. They preferred to wait.

And the minutes passed.

At  1325,  the  admiral's  buzzer  sounded  in seventy-five  ships  of  the
Foundation's line, and they  built up to a maximum acceleration towards the
front-plane of the Kalganian  fleet, itself three hundred strong. Kalganian
shields flared  into action, and  the vast energy beams  flicked out. Every
one of the three  hundred concentrated in the same direction, towards their
mad    attackers   who    bore    down   relentlessly,    uncaringly   and

At 1330,  fifty ships  under Commander Cenn  appeared from nowhere,  in one
single bound through hyperspace to a calculated spot at a calculated time 
and  were  spaced  in  tearing  fury  at  the  unprepared  Kalganian  rear.

The trap worked perfectly.

The Kalganians still had numbers on their side, but they were in no mood to
count. Their  first effort was to escape and  the formation once broken was
only the  more vulnerable,  as the enemy  ships bumbled into  one another's
path.

After a while, it took on the proportions of a rat hunt.

Of three  hundred Kalganian ships, the core and  pride of their fleet, some
sixty or  less, many in a state  of near-hopeless disrepair, reached Kalgan
once  more. The  Foundation  loss was  eight ships  out of  a total  of one
hundred twenty-five.

Preem Palver landed on  Terminus at the height of the celebration. He found
the furore distracting, but  before he left the planet, he had accomplished
two things, and received one request.

The two things accomplished were: 1) the conclusion of an agreement whereby
Palver's co-operative was to deliver twenty shiploads of certain foodstuffs
per month  for the next year at a war price,  without, thanks to the recent
battle,  a corresponding  war risk, and  2) the  transfer to Dr.  Darell of
Arcadia's five short words.

For a startled moment,  Darell had stared wide-eyed at him, and then he had
made his  request. It was to carry an answer  back to Arcadia. Palver liked
it; it  was a simple answer  and made sense. It  was: "Come back now. There
won't be any danger."

Lord Stettin was in  raging frustration. To watch his every weapon break in
his  hands; to feel  the firm fabric  of his  military might part  like the
rotten  thread   it  suddenly  turned  out  to   be    would  have  turned
phlegmaticism itself  into flowing lava. And yet  he was helpless, and knew
it.

He hadn't  really slept well in  weeks. He hadn't shaved  in three days. He
had canceled  all audiences. His admirals were  left to themselves and none
knew better  than the Lord of  Kalgan that very little  time and no further
defeats  need  elapse  before  he  would  have  to  contend  with  internal
rebellion.

Lev  Meirus,  First  Minister,  was  no  help.  He stood  there,  calm  and
indecently  old, with  his thin,  nervous finger  stroking, as  always, the
wrinkled line from nose to chin.

"Well,"  shouted  Stettin  at him,  "contribute  something.  We stand  here
defeated, do you understand? Defeated! And why? I don't know why. There you
have it. I don't know why. Do you know why?"

"I think so," said Meirus, calmly.

"Treason!" The  word came out  softly, and other words  followed as softly.
"You've  known of  treason, and you've  kept quiet.  You served the  fool I
ejected from  the First  Citizenship and you  think you can  serve whatever
foul rat  replaces me. If you  have acted so, I  will extract your entrails
for it and burn them before your living eyes."

Meirus was unmoved. "I have tried to fill you with my own doubts, not once,
but many  times. I have dinned  it in your ears  and you have preferred the
advice of  others because it  stuffed your ego better.  Matters have turned
out not as I  feared, but even worse. If you do not care to listen now, say
so, sir,  and I shall leave, and, in due  course, deal with your successor,
whose  first  act,  no   doubt,  will  be  to  sign  a  treaty  of  peace."

Stettin  stared  at  him  red-eyed,  enormous fists  slowly  clenching  and
unclenching. "Speak, you gray slug. Speak!"

"I have  told you  often, sir, that you  are not the Mule.  You may control
ships and  guns but you cannot control the minds  of your subjects. Are you
aware, sir, of who  it is you are fighting? You fight the Foundation, which
is never defeated  the Foundation, which is protected by the Seldon Plan 
the Foundation, which is destined to form a new Empire."

"There is no Plan. No longer. Munn has said so."

"Then Munn is  wrong. And if he were right, what then?  You and I, sir, are
not the people. The  men and women of Kalgan and its subject worlds believe
utterly and deeply in the Seldon Plan as do all the inhabitants of this end
of the Galaxy. Nearly four hundred years of history teach the fact that the
Foundation cannot be beaten.  Neither the kingdoms nor the warlords nor the
old Galactic Empire itself could do it."

"The Mule did it."

"Exactly, and  he was beyond calculation  and you  are not. What is worse,
the  people know that  you are not.  So your  ships go into  battle fearing
defeat in some unknown way. The insubstantial fabric of the Plan hangs over
them so  that they  are cautious and  look before they attack  and wonder a
little too  much. While on  the other side, that  same insubstantial fabric
fills the enemy with confidence, removes fear, maintains morale in the face
of early defeats. Why not? The Foundation has always been defeated at first
and has always won in the end.

"And your  own morale, sir?  You stand everywhere on  enemy territory. Your
own dominions have not  been invaded; are still not in danger of invasion 
yet  you are  defeated.  You don't  believe  in the  possibility, even,  of
victory, because you know there is none.

"Stoop, then,  or you will be beaten to  your knees. Stoop voluntarily, and
you may save a  remnant. You have depended on metal and power and they have
sustained you  as far as they  could. You have ignored  mind and morale and
they have  failed you.  Now, take my  advice. You have  the Foundation man,
Homir Munn.  Release him. Send him back to Terminus  and he will carry your
peace offers."

Stettin's teeth  ground behind his pale, set lips.  But what choice had he?

On the  first day of the new year, Homir Munn  left Kalgan again. More than
six months had passed  since he had left Terminus and in the interim, a war
had raged and faded.

He  had come  alone, but  he left  escorted. He  had come  a simple  man of
private life; he left  the unappointed but nevertheless, actual, ambassador
of peace.

And what had most changed was his early concern over the Second Foundation.
He laughed  at the  thought of that:  and pictured in  luxuriant detail the
final revelation to Dr. Darell, to that energetic, young competent, Anthor,
to all of them

He knew. He, Homir Munn, finally knew the truth.

                                     20

                                "I Know ..."

The last  two months  of the Stettinian war  did not lag for  Homir. In his
unusual office  as Mediator  Extraordinary, he found himself  the center of
interstellar  affairs,  a  role  he  could  not  help  but  find  pleasing.

There  were no  further major  battles   a few accidental  skirmishes that
could scarcely  count  and the terms of the  treaty were hammered out with
little  necessity for concessions  on the  part of the  Foundation. Stettin
retained his  office, but scarcely anything  else. His navy was dismantled;
his possessions outside the  home system itself made autonomous and allowed
to vote  for return to previous  status, full independence or confederation
within the Foundation, as they chose.

The war was formally  ended on an asteroid in Terminus' own stellar system;
site of  the Foundation's oldest naval base.  Lev Meirus signed for Kalgan,
and Homir was an interested spectator.

Throughout  all that  period  he did  not see  Dr. Darell,  nor any  of the
others. But it scarcely  mattered. His news would keep  and, as always, he
smiled at the thought.

Dr.  Darell returned  to Terminus some  weeks after  VK day, and  that same
evening, his  house served as the  meeting place for the  five men who, ten
months earlier, had laid their first plans.

They lingered over dinner and then over wine as though hesitating to return
again to the old subject.

It was  Jole Turbor,  who, peering steadily  into the purple  depths of the
wineglass with one eye, muttered, rather than said, "Well, Homir, you are a
man of affairs now, I see. You handled matters well."

"I?"  Munn  laughed  loudly  and joyously.  For  some  reason,  he had  not
stuttered in  months. "I hadn't a  thing to do with  it. It was Arcadia. By
the  by, Darell,  how is  she? She's  coming back  from Trantor,  I heard?"

"You heard  correctly," said Darell, quietly.  "Her ship should dock within
the week." He looked,  with veiled eyes, at the others, but there were only
confused,    amorphous    exclamations   of    pleasure.   Nothing    else.

Turbor said, "Then it's over, really. Who would have predicted all this ten
months ago.  Munn's been to Kalgan  and back. Arcadia's been  to Kalgan and
Trantor and is coming back. We've had a war and won it, by Space. They tell
you that  the vast sweeps of history can be  predicted, but doesn't it seem
conceivable that all that has just happened, with its absolute confusion to
those of  us who lived through it,  couldn't possibly have been predicted."

"Nonsense," said Anthor, acidly. "What makes you so triumphant, anyway? You
talk as though we  have really won a war, when actually we have won nothing
but a petty brawl which has served only to distract our minds from the real
enemy."

There was an uncomfortable silence, in which only Homir Munn's slight smile
struck a discordant note.

And Anthor  struck the arm of his chair with  a balled and furyfilled fist,
"Yes, I refer to the Second Foundation. There is no mention of it and, if I
judge correctly, every effort  to have no thought of it. Is it because this
fallacious atmosphere of victory that palls over this world of idiots is so
attractive  that  you feel  you  must participate?  Turn somersaults  then,
handspring  your  way into  a  wall,  pound one  another's  back and  throw
confetti out  the window. Do whatever  you please, only get  it out of your
system   and when you are quite done and  you are yourselves again, return
and let  us discuss that problem  which exists now precisely  as it did ten
months ago when you  sat here with eyes cocked over your shoulders for fear
of  you knew not  what. Do you  really think  that the Mind-masters  of the
Second  Foundation are  less  to be  feared because  you  have beat  down a
foolish wielder of spaceships."

He paused, red-faced and panting.

Munn said quietly, "Will you hear me speak now, Anthor? Or do you prefer to
continue your role as ranting conspirator?"

"Have  your say,  Homir," said Darell,  "but let's  all of us  refrain from
over-picturesqueness of language. It's  a very good thing in its place, but
at present, it bores me."

Homir Munn  leaned back  in his armchair  and carefully refilled  his glass
from the decanter at his elbow.

"I was sent to Kalgan," he said, "to find out what I could from the records
contained in the Mule's  Palace. I spent several months doing so. I seek no
credit for  that accomplishment. As I have  indicated, it was Arcadia whose
ingenuous intermeddling  obtained the entry for  me. Nevertheless, the fact
remains that to my  original knowledge of the Mule's life and times, which,
I  submit, was  not  small, I  have added  the fruits  of much  labor among
primary   evidence   which   has   been   available   to   no   one   else.

"I am,  therefore, in a unique position to estimate  the true danger of the
Second  Foundation;  much  more  so than  is  our  excitable friend  here."

"And,"   grated  Anthor,   "what   is  your   estimate  of   that  danger?"

"Why, zero."

A short  pause, and Elvett Semic asked with  an air of surprised disbelief,
"You mean zero danger?"

"Certainly. Friends, there is no Second Foundation!"

Anthor's  eyelids   closed  slowly   and  he  sat  there,   face  pale  and
expressionless.

Munn continued, aftention-centering and loving it, "And what is more, there
was never one."

"On  what,"  asked  Darell,  "do  you  base  this  surprising  conclusion?"

"I deny," said Munn,  "that it is surprising. You all know the story of the
Mule's  search for  the  Second Foundation.  But what  do  you know  of the
intensity  of  that  search    of  the  single-mindedness of  it.  He  had
tremendous  resources at  his disposal  and he  spared none  of it.  He was
single-minded    and  yet  he failed.  No  Second  Foundation was  found."

"One could scarcely expect it to be found," pointed out Turbor, restlessly.
"It   had   means   of   protecting  itself   against   inquiring   minds."

"Even when  the mind  that is inquiring  is the Mule's  mutant mentality? I
think not.  But come, you  do not expect me  to give you the  gist of fifty
volumes of  reports in five minutes.  All of it, by  the terms of the peace
treaty will  be part  of the Seldon  Historical Museum eventually,  and you
will all  be free to be  as leisurely in your analysis  as I have been. You
will find  his conclusion plainly stated, however,  and that I have already
expressed.  There  is not,  and  has  never been,  any Second  Foundation."

Semic interposed, "Well, what stopped the Mule, then?"

"Great Galaxy, what  do you suppose stopped him? Death did; as it will stop
all  of us.  The  greatest superstition  of the  age is  that the  Mule was
somehow  stopped in  an all-conquering  career by some  mysterious entities
superior  even to  himself. It is  the result  of looking at  everything in
wrong focus.

"Certainly no one in the Galaxy can help knowing that the Mule was a freak,
physical  as  well  as   mental.  He  died  in  his  thirties  because  his
ill-adjusted body  could no  longer struggle its  creaking machinery along.
For several  years before his death he was an  invalid. His best health was
never more than an ordinary man's feebleness. All right, then. He conquered
the Galaxy and, in  the ordinary course of nature, proceeded to die. It's a
wonder he  proceeded as long and  as well as he  did. Friends, it's down in
the very  clearest print. You have only to have  patience. You have only to
try to look at all facts in new focus."

Darell  said, thoughtfully,  "Good, let us  try that  Munn. It would  be an
interesting  attempt and,  if nothing  else, would  help oil  our thoughts.
These tampered  men   the records of  which Anthor brought to  us nearly a
year ago, what of them? Help us to see them in focus."

"Easily. How old a science is encephalographic analysis? Or, put it another
way,   how   well-developed   is   the   study   of   neuronic   pathways."

"We  are  at  the   beginning  in  this  respect.  Granted,"  said  Darell.

"Right. How  certain can we be  then as to the  interpretation of what I've
heard Anthor and yourself  call the Tamper Plateau. You have your theories,
but how certain can  you be. Certain enough to consider it a firm basis for
the existence  of a mighty force for which  all other evidence is negative?
It's always  easy to  explain the unknown  by postulating a  superhuman and
arbitrary will.

"It's a  very human phenomenon. There have  been cases all through Galactic
history  where isolated  planetary systems  have reverted to  savagery, and
what  have we  learned  there? In  every case,  such savages  attribute the
to-them-incomprehensible forces of Nature  storms, pestilences, droughts 
to   sentient  beings   more   powerful  and   more  arbitrary   than  men.

"It  is called  anthropomorphism, I  believe, and  in this respect,  we are
savages  and indulge  in  it. Knowing  little of  mental science,  we blame
anything we don't know on supermen  those of the Second Foundation in this
case, based on the hint thrown us by Seldon."

"Oh,"  broke in Anthor,  "then you  do remember  Seldon. I thought  you had
forgotten. Seldon did say there was a Second Foundation. Get that in focus.

"And  are  you  aware  then  of all  Seldon's  purposes. Do  you know  what
necessities were  involved in  his calculations? The  Second Foundation may
have been  a very necessary scarecrow, with a  highly specific end in view.
How did  we defeat Kalgan, for instance? What were  you saying in your last
series of articles, Turbor?"

Turbor  stirred his bulk.  "Yes, I see  what "You're  driving at. I  was on
Kalgan towards the end, Darell, and it was quite obvious that morale on the
planet was incredibly bad.  I looked through their news-records and  well.
they expected to be  beaten. Actually, they were completely unmanned by the
thought that  eventually the  Second Foundation would  take a hand,  on the
side of the First, naturally."

"Quite right," said Munn.  "I was there all through the war. I told Stettin
there was no Second  Foundation and he believed me. He felt safe. But there
was no way of  making the people suddenly disbelieve what they had believed
all their  lives, so that the myth eventually  served a very useful purpose
in Seldon's cosmic chess game."

But Anthor's eyes opened, quite suddenly, and fixed themselves sardonically
on Munn's countenance. "I say you lie."

Homir turned pale, "I don't see that I have to accept, much less answer, an
accusation of that nature."

"I say it without any intention of personal offense. You cannot help lying;
you   don't  realize   that  you   are.  But   you  lie  just   the  same."

Semic laid  his withered  hand on the  young man's sleeve.  "Take a breath,
young fella."

Anthor shook him off,  none too gently, and said, "I'm out of patience with
all of  you. I  haven't seen this  man more than  half a dozen  times in my
life, yet I find the change in him unbelievable. The rest of you have known
him for years, yet  pass it by. It is enough to drive  one mad. Do you call
this man  you've been listening to  Homir Munn? He is not  the Homir Munn I
knew."

A medley  of shock; above which Munn's voice cried, "You  claim me to be an
impostor?"

"Perhaps not in the  ordinary sense," shouted Anthor above the din, "but an
impostor   nonetheless.   Quiet,  everyone!   I   demand   to  be   heard."

He frowned  them ferociously into obedience. "Do  any of you remember Homir
Munn as  I do  the introverted librarian  who never talked without obvious
embarrassment; the  man of tense  and nervous voice, who  stuttered out his
uncertain  sentences? Does   this man  sound  like him?  He's fluent,  he's
confident, he's  fun of theories, and, by Space, he  doesn't stutter. Is he
the same person?"

Even Munn  looked confused,  and Pelleas Anthor  drove on. "Well,  shall we
test him?"

"How?" asked Darell.

"You  ask how?  There  is the  obvious way.  You have  his encephalographic
record  of  ten months  ago,  haven't  you? Run  one  again, and  compare."

He pointed  at the frowning librarian,  and said violently, "I  dare him to
refuse to subject himself to analysis."

"I  don't object,"  said  Munn, defiantly.  "I am  the  man I  always was."

"Can you know?" said Anthor with contempt. "Ill go further. I trust no one
here. I  want everyone to undergo analysis. There has  been a war. Munn has
been on  Kalgan; Turbor has been on board ship and  all over the war areas.
Darell and Semic have  been absent, too  I have no idea where. Only I have
remained here  in seclusion  and safety, and  I no longer trust  any of the
rest  of you.  And to  play fair, Ill  submit to  testing as well.  Are we
agreed then? Or do I leave now and go my own way?"

Turbor shrugged and said, "I have no objection."

"I have already said I don't," said Munn.

Semic moved a hand in silent assent, and Anthor waited for Darell. Finally,
Darell nodded his head.

"Take me first," said Anthor.

The  needles traced their  delicate way  across the cross-hatchings  as the
young  neurologist  sat frozen  in  the  reclining seat,  with lidded  eyes
brooding  heavily. From  the  files, Darell  removed the  folder containing
Anthor's   old  encephalographic   record.  He   showed  them   to  Anthor.

"That's your own signature, isn't it?"

"Yes, yes. It's my record. Make the comparison."

The scanner  threw old  and new on  to the screen.  All six  curves in each
recording were  there, and in  the darkness, Munn's voice  sounded in harsh
clarity. "Well, now, look there. There's a change."

"Those are the primary  waves of the frontal lobe. It doesn't mean a thing,
Homir. Those  additional jags you're  pointing to are just  anger. It's the
others that count."

He touched  a control  knob and the  six pairs melted into  one another and
coincided.  The deeper  amplitude of  primaries alone  introduced doubling.

"Satisfied?" asked Anthor.

Darell  nodded curtly  and took  the seat  himself. Semic followed  him and
Turbor followed him. Silently the curves were collected; silently they were
compared.

Munn was the last  to take his seat. For a moment, he hesitated, then, with
a touch  of desperation in his voice, he said,  "Well now, look, I'm coming
in last and I'm under tension. I expect due allowance to be made for that."

"There will  be," Darell assured  him. "No conscious emotion  of yours will
affect   more   than   the  primaries   and   they   are  not   important."

It   might  have   been  hours,   in  the   utter  silence   that  followed

And then  in the  darkness of the  comparison, Anthor said  huskily: "Sure,
sure, it's only the onset of a complex. Isn't that what he told us? No such
thing as  tampering; it's all a silly anthropomorphic  notion  but look at
it! A coincidence I suppose."

"What's the matter?" shrieked Munn.

Darell's hand was tight  on the librarian's shoulder. "Quiet, Munn  you've
been handled; you've been adjusted by them."

Then the  light went on, and  Munn was looking about  him with broken eyes,
making a horrible attempt to smile.

"You can't  be serious, surely. There is a  purpose to this. You're testing
me."

But   Darell  only   shook   his  head.   "No,  no,   Homir.   It's  true."

The librarian's  eyes were filled  with tears, suddenly. "I  don't feel any
different. I  can't believe  it." With sudden  conviction: "You are  all in
this. It's a conspiracy."

Darell attempted  a soothing gesture,  and his hand was  struck aside. Munn
snarled, "You're  planning to  kill me. By  Space, you're planning  to kill
me."

With  a lunge,  Anthor  was upon  him. There  was the  sharp crack  of bone
against bone, and Homir  was limp and flaccid with that look of fear frozen
on his face.

Anthor rose shakily, and  said, "We'd better tie and gag him. Later, we can
decide what to do." He brushed his long hair back.

Turbor  said, "How  did  you guess  there  was something  wrong with  him?"

Anthor  turned sardonically  upon  him. "It  wasn't difficult.  You see,  I
happen to know where the Second Foundation really is."

Successive shocks have a decreasing effect

It was  with actual mildness that Semic asked, "Are  you sure? I mean weve
just gone through this sort of business with Munn"

This  isn't quite  the  same," returned  Anthor. "Darell,  the day  the war
started, I spoke to you most seriously. I tried to have you leave Terminus.
I would have told  you then what I will tell you now, if I had been able to
trust you."

"You  mean you  have  known the  answer for  half  a year?"  smiled Darell.

"I  have  known it  from  the  time I  learned  that Arcadia  had left  for
Trantor."

And Darell  started to his feet in  sudden consternation. "What had Arcadia
to do with it? What are you implying?"

"Absolutely nothing that is not plain on the face of all the events we know
so well. Arcadia goes  to Kalgan and flees in terror to the  very center of
the Galaxy,  rather than return home. Lieutenant  Dirige, our best agent on
Kalgan is tampered with. Homir Munn goes to Kalgan and he is tampered with.
The  Mule conquered  the Galaxy,  but, queerly  enough, he made  Kalgan his
headquarters,  and  it occurs  to  me to  wonder  if he  was conqueror  or,
perhaps, tool.  At every  turn, we meet  with Kalgan, Kalgan   nothing but
Kalgan, the world that  somehow survived untouched all the struggles of the
warlords for over a century."

"Your conclusion, then."

"Is  obvious," Anthor's  eyes were  intense. "The  Second Foundation  is on
Kalgan."

Turbor interrupted.  "I was  on Kalgan, Anthor.  I was there  last week. If
there was any Second  Foundation on it, I'm mad. Personally, I think you're
mad."

The young man whirled on him savagely. "Then you're a fat fool. What do you
expect the  Second Foundation  to be? A  grammar school? Do  you think that
Radiant Fields  in tight beams  spell out Second Foundation'  in green and
purple along the incoming  spaceship routes? Listen to me, Turbor. Wherever
they are,  they form a tight oligarchy. They must be  as well hidden on the
world  on which  they exist,  as the  world itself  is in  the Galaxy  as a
whole."

Turbor's  jaw  muscles  writhed.  "I  don't like  your  attitude,  Anthor."

"That  certainly disturbs  me," was  the sarcastic  response. "Take  a look
about you here on  Terminus. Were at the center  the core  the origin of
the First Foundation with  all its knowledge of physical science. Well, how
many of  the population are physical scientists? Can  you operate an Energy
Transmitting Station?  What do you  know of the operation  of a hyperatomic
motor? Eh?  The number of real scientists on Terminus   even on Terminus 
can   be  numbered   at   less  than   one  percent   of   the  population.

"And what  then of the  Second Foundation where secrecy  must be preserved.
There will still be  less of the cognoscenti, and these will be hidden even
from their own world."

"Say," said Semic, carefully. "We just licked Kalgan"

"So we  did. So we did," said Anthor,  sardonically. "Oh, we celebrate that
victory.  The cities  are still  illuminated; they  are still  shooting off
fireworks; they are still  shouting over the televisors. But now, now, when
the search  is on  once more for  the Second Foundation, where  is the last
place well look; where  is the last place anyone will look? Right!" Kalgan!

"We haven't  hurt them, you  know; not really. We've  destroyed some ships,
killed a  few thousands, torn away  their Empire, taken over  some of their
commercial and economic power  but that all means nothing. I'll wager that
not  one  member  of the  real  ruling  class of  Kalgan  is  in the  least
discomfited. On  the contrary,  they are now  safe from curiosity.  But not
from my curiosity. What do you say, Darell?"

Darell shrugged his shoulders. "Interesting. Im trying to fit it in with a
message I received from Arcadia a few months since."

"Oh, a message?" asked Anthor. "And what was it?"

"Well,  I'm   not  certain.   Five  short  words.   But  its  interesting."

"Look," broke in Semic, with a worried interest, "there's something I don't
understand."

"What's that?"

Semic chose  his words carefully, his old upper  lip lifting with each word
as if  to let them out  singly and reluctantly. "Well,  now, Homir Munn was
saying just  a while ago that  Hari Seldon was faking  when he said that he
had established  a Second Foundation.  Now you're saying that  it's not so;
that Seldon wasn't faking, eh?"

"Right,  he  wasn't  faking.  Seldon  said  he  had  established  a  Second
Foundation and so he had."

"All right,  then, but he said something else,  too. He said he established
the two  Foundations at  opposite ends of  the Galaxy. Now, young  man, was
that  a fake   because Kalgan isn't  at the  opposite end of  the Galaxy."

Anthor seemed annoyed, "That's  a minor point. That part may well have been
a cover  up to protect them.  But after all, think  What real use would it
serve to  have the Mind-masters at the opposite end  of the Galaxy? What is
their function? To help preserve the Plan. Who are the main card players of
the Plan?  We, the First Foundation. Where can  they best observe us, then,
and serve  their own ends? At  the opposite end of  the Galaxy? Ridiculous!
They're  within  fifty parsecs,  actually,  which is  much more  sensible."

"I like  that argument,"  said Darell. "It  makes sense. Look  here, Munn's
been conscious  for some time and  I propose we loose  him. He can't do any
harm, really."

Anthor looked  rebellious, but  Homir was nodding  vigorously. Five seconds
later he was rubbing his wrists just as vigorously.

"How do you feel?" asked Darell.

"Rotten," said Munn, sulkily,  "but never mind. There's something I want to
ask this bright young  thing here. I've heard what he's had to say, and Id
just like permission to wonder what we do next."

There was a queer and incongruous silence.

Munn smiled  bitterly. "Well, suppose Kalgan is  the Second Foundation. Who
on Kalgan  are they? How are  you going to find them?  How are you going to
tackle them if you find them, eh?"

"Ah," said  Darell, "I can answer that, strangely  enough. Shall I tell you
what  Semic and  I have  been doing  this past  half-year? It may  give you
another reason,  Anthor, why I was  anxious to remain on  Terminus all this
time."

"In the  first place," he  went on, "I've been  working on encephalographic
analysis with  more purpose than  any of you may  suspect. Detecting Second
Foundation  minds is  a  little more  subtle than  simply finding  a Tamper
Plateau    and I  did  not  actually succeed.  But  I  came close  enough.

"Do you know, any  of you, how emotional control works? It's been a popular
subject with  fiction writers since the time of  the Mule and much nonsense
has been written, spoken,  and recorded about it. For the most part, it has
been treated as something  mysterious and occult. Of course, it isn't. That
the brain is the  source of a myriad, tiny electromagnetic fields, everyone
knows. Every fleeting emotion varies those fields in more or less intricate
fashion, and everyone should know that, too.

"Now  it is  possible to  conceive a  mind which  can sense  these changing
fields  and  even resonate  with  them. That  is,  a special  organ of  the
cerebrum can exist which  can take on whatever field-pattern it may detect.
Exactly how it would do this, I have no idea, but that doesn't matter. if I
were blind,  for instance, I could still  learn the significance of photons
and energy quanta and it could be reasonable to me that the absorption of a
photon of  such energy could create  chemical changes in some  organ of the
body such  that its presence would  be detectable. But, of  course, I would
not be able, thereby, to understand color.

"Do all of you follow?"

There  was  a  firm  nod from  Anthor;  a  doubtful  nod  from the  others.

"Such  a hypothetical  Mind Resonating  Organ, by  adjusting itself  to the
Fields  emitted by  other minds  could perform  what is popularly  known as
'reading emotion or even 'reading minds, which is actually something even
more subtle. It is  but an easy step from that to imagining a similar organ
which could  actually force an adjustment on  another mind. It could orient
with its  stronger Field the weaker one of another mind   much as a strong
magnet  will orient  the  atomic dipoles  in a  bar of  steel and  leave it
magnetized thereafter.

"I  solved the  mathematics  of Second  Foundationism in  the sense  that I
evolved a function that would predict the necessary combination of neuronic
paths that  would allow for the  formation of an organ  such as I have just
described  but, unfortunately, the function is too complicated to solve by
any of the mathematical tools at present known. That is too bad, because it
means that I can never detect a Mind-worker by his encephalographic pattern
alone.

"But I could do  something else. I could, with Semic's help, construct what
I shall describe as a Mental Static device. It is not beyond the ability of
modem  science   to  create  an  energy   source  that  will  duplicate  an
encephalograph-type pattern  of electromagnetic field. Moreover,  it can be
made  to shift  at  complete random,  creating, as  far as  this particular
mind-sense is  concerned, a sort  of 'noise' or 'static'  which masks other
minds with which it may be in contact.

"Do you still follow?"

Semic  chuckled. He  had  helped create  blindly, but  he had  guessed, and
guessed correctly. The old man had a trick or two left

Anthor said, "I think I do."

"The device," continued Darell, "is a fairly easy one to produce, and I had
all the  resources of the Foundation under my control  as it came under the
heading of  war research. And  now the mayor's offices  and the Legislative
assemblies  are surrounded  with  Mental Static.  So  are most  of our  key
factories. So  is this building. Eventually, any place  we wish can be made
absolutely safe  from the  Second Foundation or  from any future  Mule. And
that's it."

He   ended  quite  simply   with  a   flat-palmed  gesture  of   the  hand.

Turbor seemed  stunned. "Then it's all over.  Great Seldon, it's all over."

"Well," said Darell, "not exactly."

"How, not exactly? Is there something more?"

"Yes, we haven't located the Second Foundation yet!"

"What," roared Anthor, "are you trying to say"

"Yes, I am. Kalgan is not the Second Foundation."

"How do you know?"

"It's easy,"  grunted Darell.  "You see  I happen to know  where the Second
Foundation really is."

                                     21

                         The Answer That Satisfied

Turbor  laughed  suddenly    laughed in  huge,  windy  gusts that  bounced
ringingly off  the walls and died in gasps. He  shook his head, weakly, and
said, "Great  Galaxy, this goes on all night. One  after another, we put up
our straw  men to be knocked down. We have fun,  but we don't get anywhere.
Space!  Maybe all  planets are  the Second  Foundation. Maybe they  have no
planet, just  key men spread on  all the planets. And  what does it matter,
since Darell says we have the perfect defense?"

Darell smiled  without humor.  "The perfect defense is  not enough, Turbor.
Even my  Mental Static device is  only something that keeps  us in the same
place. We cannot remain forever with our fists doubled, frantically staring
in all directions for  the unknown enemy. We must know not only how to win,
but  whom to  defeat. And  there  is a  specific world  on which  the enemy
exists."

"Get  to  the  point," said  Anthor,  wearily.  "What's your  information?"

"Arcadia," said Darell, "sent me a message, and until I got it, I never saw
the obvious.  I probably  would never have  seen the obvious. Yet  it was a
simple  message   that  went:  'A   circle  has  no  end.   Do  you  see?"

"No,"  said Anthor,  stubbornly,  and he  spoke, quite  obviously,  for the
others.

"A  circle  has no  end,"  repeated  Munn, thoughtfully,  and his  forehead
furrowed.

"Well,"  said Darell,  impatiently, "it was  clear to  me What is  the one
absolute fact  we know about the  Second Foundation, eh? I'll  tell you! We
know that  Hari Seldon located it at the opposite  end of the Galaxy. Homir
Munn  theorized that  Seldon lied  about the  existence of  the Foundation.
Pelleas Anthor theorized that  Seldon had told the truth that far, but lied
about the location of  the Foundation. But I tell you that Hari Seldon lied
in no particular; that he told the absolute truth.

"But, what  is the other end?  The Galaxy is a  flat, lens-shaped object. A
cross section along the flatness of it is a circle, and a circle had no end
  as Arcadia  realized. We   we,  the First  Foundation  are  located on
Terminus at  the rim  of that circle.  We are at  an end of  the Galaxy, by
definition.  Now follow  the rim  of that  circle and  find the  other end.
Follow it,  follow it, follow it, and you will find  no other end. You will
merely come back to your starting point

"And there you will find the Second Foundation."

"There?" repeated Anthor. "Do you mean here?"

"Yes, I mean here!"  cried Darell, energetically. "Why, where else could it
possibly be?  You said yourself  that if the Second  Foundationers were the
guardians of the Seldon Plan, it was unlikely that they could be located at
the so-called  other end of the Galaxy, where they  would be as isolated as
they could conceivably be. You thought that fifty parsecs distance was more
sensible. I tell you  that that is also too far. That no distance at all is
more  sensible. And  where would they  be safest?  Who would look  for them
here? Oh, it's the  old principle of the most obvious place being the least
suspicious.

"Why was poor Ebling  Mis so surprised and unmanned by his discovery of the
location of the Second Foundation? There he was, looking for it desperately
in order to warn  it of the coming of the Mule, only  to find that the Mule
had already  captured both  Foundations at a  stroke. And why  did the Mule
himself  fail.  in  his  search?  Why  not?  If  one is  searching  for  an
unconquerable  menace, one  would scarcely  look among the  enemies already
conquered.  So the  Mind-masters, in  their own  leisurely time,  could lay
their   plans  to   stop  the   Mule,  and   succeeded  in   stopping  him.

"Oh,  it is  maddeningly simple.  For here  we are  with our plots  and our
schemes, thinking  that we are keeping  our secrecy  when  all the time we
are in  the very heart and core of  our enemy's stronghold. It's humorous."

Anthor did  not remove the skepticism from  his face, "You honestly believe
this theory, Dr. Darell?"

"I honestly believe it."

"Then any of our neighbors, any man we pass in the street might be a Second
Foundation superman, with his  mind watching yours and feeling the pulse of
its thoughts."

"Exactly."

"And we have been permitted to proceed all this time, without molestation?"

"Without  molestation? Who told  you we  were not molested?  You, yourself,
showed that Munn has  been tampered with. What makes you think that we sent
him to  Kalgan in  the first place entirely  of our own volition   or that
Arcadia overheard  us and  followed him on  her own volition?  Hah! We have
been molested  without pause, probably.  And after all, why  should they do
more than  they have? It is  far more to their  benefit to mislead us, than
merely to stop us."

Anthor  buried   himself  in  meditation  and   emerged  therefrom  with  a
dissatisfied expression.  "Well, then, I don't  like it. Your Mental Static
isn't worth a thought. We can't stay in the house forever and as soon as we
leave, we're  lost, with what we now think we know.  Unless you can build a
little machine for every inhabitant in the Galaxy."

"Yes,  but  we're not  quite  helpless,  Anthor. These  men  of the  Second
Foundation have  a special  sense which we  lack. It is  their strength and
also their weakness. For  instance, is there any weapon of attack that will
be effective against a normal, sighted man which is useless against a blind
man?"

"Sure," said Munn, promptly. "A light in the eyes."

"Exactly," said Darell. "A good, strong blinding light."

"Well, what of it?" asked Turbor.

"But  the analogy  is clear.  I have a  Mind Static  device. It sets  up an
artificial  electromagnetic pattern,  which  to the  mind of  a man  of the
Second Foundation would be  like a beam of light to us. But the Mind Static
device is  kaleidoscopic. It  shifts quickly and  continuously, faster than
the receiving  mind can  follow. All right  then, consider it  a flickering
light; the  kind that would give you a  headache, if continued long enough.
Now intensify that light or that electromagnetic field until it is blinding
 and  it will become a  pain, an unendurable pain.  But only to those with
the proper sense; not to the unsensed."

"Really?" said  Anthor, with the beginnings  of enthusiasm. "Have you tried
this?"

"On   whom?  Of   course,  I   haven't  tried   it.  But  it   will  work."

"Well,  where do  you have the  controls for  the Field that  surrounds the
house? Id like to see this thing."

"Here."  Darell reached  into  his jacket  pocket.  It was  a small  thing,
scarcely bulging his pocket.  He tossed the black, knob-studded cylinder to
the other.

Anthor inspected it carefully  and shrugged his shoulders. "It doesn't make
me any  smarter to look at  it. Look Darell, what  mustn't I touch? I don't
want   to   turn  off   the   house   defense  by   accident,  you   know."

"You won't," said Darell, indifferently. "That control is locked in place."
He flicked at a toggle switch that didn't move.

"And what's this knob?"

"That  one varies  rate of  shift of  pattern. Here   this one  varies the
intensity. It's that which I've been referring to."

"May I"  asked Anthor, with his  finger on the intensity  knob. The others
were crowding close.

"Why not?" shrugged DarelI. "It won't affect us."

Slowly, almost  wincingly, Anthor turned the  knob, first in one direction,
then in another. Turbor was gritting his teeth, while Munn blinked his eyes
rapidly.  It  was as  though  they  were keening  their inadequate  sensory
equipment   to  locate   this   impulse  which   could  not   affect  them.

Finally, Anthor shrugged and tossed the control box back into Darell's lap.
"Well, I  suppose we can take your word for it.  But it's certainly hard to
imagine   that   anything  was   happening   when  I   turned  the   knob."

"But naturally, Pelleas Anthor,"  said Darell, with a tight smile. "The one
I gave you was a dummy. You see I have another." He tossed his jacket aside
and  seized   a  duplicate  of  the  control   box  that  Anthor  had  been
investigating, which swung from his belt.

"You see,"  said Darell,  and in one  gesture turned the  intensity knob to
maximum.

And with  an unearthly shriek, Pelleas Anthor sank  to the floor. He rolled
in his agony; whitened,  gripping fingers clutching and tearing futilely at
his hair.

Munn lifted  his feet hastily  to prevent contact with  the squirming body,
and his  eyes were twin depths  of horror. Semic and  Turbor were a pair of
plaster casts; stiff and white.

Darell, somber, turned the  knob back once more. And Anthor twitched feebly
once or  twice and  lay still. He  was alive, his breath  racking his body.

"Lift him  on to  the couch," said  Darell, grasping the  young man's head.
"Help me here."

Turbor reached for the  feet. They might have been lifting a sack of flour.
Then, after long minutes,  the breathing grew quieter, and Anthor's eyelids
fluttered and  lifted. His face was a horrid yellow;  his hair and body was
soaked  in perspiration,  and  his voice,  when he  spoke, was  cracked and
unrecognizable.

"Don't,"  he muttered,  "don't! Don't  do that  again! You don't  know You
don't know Oh-h-h." It was a long, trembling moan.

"We won't  do it again," said  Darell, "if you will  tell us the truth. You
are a member of the Second Foundation?"

"Let me have some water," pleaded Anthor.

"Get  some,   Turbor,"  said  Darell,  "and   bring  the  whiskey  bottle."

He repeated the question  after pouring a jigger of whiskey and two glasses
of  water  into  Anthor.  Something  seemed  to  relax in  the  young  man

"Yes,"  he  said,  wearily.  "I am  a  member  of  the Second  Foundation."

"Which,"   continued   Darell,   "is   located   on   Terminus      here?"

"Yes,   yes.   You   are   right   in  every   particular,   Dr.   Darell."

"Good! Now  explain what's  been happening this  past half year.  Tell us!"

"I would like to sleep," whispered Anthor.

"Later! Speak now!"

A tremulous sigh. Then  words, low and hurried. The others bent over him to
catch  the  sound,  "The  situation was  growing  dangerous.  We knew  that
Terminus and its physical scientists were becoming interested in brain-wave
patterns and that the times were ripe for the development of something like
the  Mind Static  device. And  there was  growing enmity toward  the Second
Foundation.   We   had  to   stop   it  without   ruining  SeIdon's   Plan.

"We ...  we tried  to control the movement.  We tried to join  it. It would
turn suspicion and efforts  away from us. We saw to it that Kalgan declared
war as  a further distraction. That's why I  sent Munn to Kalgan. Stettin's
supposed mistress  was one of us.  She saw to it  that Munn made the proper
moves"

"Callia is" cried Munn, but Darell waved him silent.

Anthor continued, unaware of any interruption, "Arcadia followed. We hadn't
counted on  that  can't foresee  everything  so Callia  maneuvered her to
Trantor  to  prevent  interference.  That's  all.  Except  that  we  lost."

"You  tried  to  get  me to  go  to  Trantor,  didn't  you?" asked  Darell.

Anthor nodded, "Had to  get you out of the way. The growing triumph in your
mind was  clear enough.  You were solving  the problems of  the Mind Static
device."

"Why didn't you put me under control?"

"Couldn't ... couldn't. Had my orders. We were working according to a Plan.
If I  improvised, I  would have thrown  everything off. Plan  only predicts
probabilities ... you know  that ... like Seldon's Plan." He was talking in
anguished  pants, and almost  incoherently. His  head twisted from  side to
side in  a restless fever. "We  worked with individuals ...  not groups ...
very low  probabilities involved ...  lost out. Besides ...  if control you
... someone else invent device ... no use ... had to control times ... more
subtle ...  First Speaker's own plan  ... don't know all  angles ... except
... didn't work a-a-a" He ran down.

Darell shook him roughly, "You can't sleep yet. How many of you are there?"

"Huh? Whatjasay  ... oh ... not many ... be  surprised fifty ... don't need
more."

"All here on Terminus?"

"Five  ...   six  out  in  Space  ...  like   Callia  ...  got  to  sleep."

He  stirred  himself  suddenly  as though  to  one  giant  effort, and  his
expressions gained in clarity. It was a last attempt at self-justification,
at moderating his defeat.

"Almost got you at  the end. Would have turned off defenses and seized you.
Would  have  seen who  was  master.  But you  gave  me  dummy controls  ...
suspected me all along"

And finally he was asleep.

Turbor  said,  in awed  tones,  "How  long did  you  suspect him,  Darell?"

"Ever  since he  first came here,"  was the  quiet response. "He  came from
Kleise, he said. But  I knew Kleise; and I knew on what terms we parted. He
was a  fanatic on the subject  of the Second Foundation  and I had deserted
him. My own purposes were reasonable, since I thought it best and safest to
pursue my  own notions by myself.  But I couldn't tell  Kleise that; and he
wouldn't have  listened if  I had. To  him, I was  a coward  and a traitor,
perhaps even  an agent of the Second Foundation.  He was an unforgiving man
and from that  time almost to the day of his death  he had no dealings with
me. Then, suddenly, in his last few weeks of life, he writes me  as an old
friend   to greet  his best and  most promising  pupil as a  co-worker and
begin again the old investigation.

"It was  out of  character. How could  he possibly do such  a thing without
being under  outside influence, and I  began to wonder if  the only purpose
might not  be to  introduce into my  confidence a real agent  of the Second
Foundation. Well, it was so"

He sighed and closed his own eyes for a moment.

Semic put in hesitantly, "What will we do with all of them ... these Second
Foundation fellas?"

"I  don't know,"  said  Darell, sadly.  "We  could exile  them, I  suppose.
There's  Zoranel, for  instance. They  can be  placed there and  the planet
saturated with  Mind Static. The sexes can  be separated, or, better still,
they can be sterilized   and in fifty years, the Second Foundation will be
a thing  of the  past. Or perhaps  a quiet death  for all of  them would be
kinder."

"Do you  suppose," said  Turbor, "we could  learn the use of  this sense of
theirs. Or are they born with it, like the Mule."

"I don't  know. I think it is developed  through long training, since there
are  indications from  encephalography  that the  potentialities of  it are
latent in  the human mind. But  what do you want  that sense for? It hasn't
helped them."

He frowned.

Though he said nothing, his thoughts were shouting.

It had been too easy  too easy. They had fallen, these invincibles, fallen
like book-villains, and he didn't like it.

Galaxy! When  can a man know  he is not a puppet? How can  a man know he is
not a puppet?

Arcadia was coming home, and his thoughts shuddered away from that which he
must face in the end.

She was home  for a week, then two, and he could  not loose the tight check
upon  those thoughts.  How could he?  She had  changed from child  to young
woman in  her absence, by some  strange alchemy. She was  his link to life;
his fink  to a bittersweet marriage  that scarcely outlasted his honeymoon.

And then, late one evening, he said as casually as he could, "Arcadia, what
made    you   decide    that   Terminus   contained    both   Foundations?"

They had  been to the theater; in the  best seats with private trimensional
viewers for  each; her dress was  new for the occasion,  and she was happy.

She stared  at him  for a moment,  then tossed it  off. "Oh,  I Don't know,
Father. It just came to me."

A layer of ice thickened about Dr. Darell's heart.

"Think," he said, intensely.  "This is important. What made you decide both
Foundations were on Terminus."

She frowned slightly. "Well, there was Lady Callia. I knew she was a Second
Foundationer. Anthor said so, too."

"But  she  was on  Kalgan,"  insisted  Darell.  "What  made  you decide  on
Terminus?"

And now  Arcadia waited for several  minutes before she answered.  What had
made her decide? What had made her decide?

She had the horrible sensation of something slipping just beyond her grasp.

She said, "She knew  about things  Lady Callia did  and must have had her
information   from   Terminus.    Doesn't   that   sound   right,   Father?

But he just shook his head at her.

"Father," she cried, "I  knew. The more I thought, the surer I was. It just
made sense."

There was that lost  look in her father's eyes, "It's no good, Arcadia. Its
no good. Intuition is suspicious when concerned with the Second Foundation.
You see that,  don't you? It might have been intuition   and it might have
been control!"

"Control! You  mean they  changed me? Oh,  no. No, they  couldn't." She was
backing away from him.  "But didn't Anthor say I was right? He admitted it.
He  admitted everything.  And you've  found the  whole bunch right  here on
Trantor.   Didn't   you?   Didn't   you?"  She   was   breathing   quickly.

"I know, but Arcadia, will you let me make an encephalographic analysis of
your brain?'

She shook her head violently, "No, no! I'm too scared."

"Of me, Arcadia? There's nothing to be afraid of. But we must know. You see
that, don't you?"

She interrupted  him only  once, after that.  She clutched at  his arm just
before the  last switch was thrown.  "What if I  am different, Father? What
will you have to do?"

"I won't  have to  do anything, Arcadia.  If you're different,  well leave.
Well  go back  to  Trantor, you  and I,  and  ... and  we won't  care about
anything else in the Galaxy."

Never in  Darell's life  had an analysis  proceeded so slowly,  cost him so
much, and  when it was over, Arcadia huddled down  and dared not look. Then
she  heard him  laugh and that  was information  enough. She jumped  up and
threw herself into his opened arms.

He was  babbling wildly as they  squeezed one another, "The  house is under
maximum Mind Static and your brain-waves are normal. We really have trapped
them, Arcadia, and we can go back to living."

"Father,"   she  gasped,   "can   we  let   them  give   us   medals  now?"

"How did  you know Id asked  to be left out  of it?" He held  her at arm's
mind;  you  know everything.  All  right,  you can  have  your  medal on  a
platform, with speeches."

"And Father?"

"Yes?"

"Can you call me Arkady from now on."

"But Very well, Arkady."

Slowly the  magnitude of  the victory was  soaking into him  and saturating
him. The Foundation   the First Foundation  now the only Foundation  was
absolute master of the  Galaxy. No further barrier stood between themselves
and  the   Second  Empire    the   final  fulfillment  of  Seldon's  Plan.

They had only to reach for it

Thanks to

                                     22

                          The Answer That Was True

An unlocated room on an unlocated world!

And a man whose plan had worked.

The First Speaker looked up at the Student, "Fifty men and women," he said.
"Fifty martyrs! They knew it meant death or permanent imprisonment and they
could not  even be oriented to prevent  weakening  since orientation might
have been detected. Yet they did not weaken. They brought the plan through,
because they loved the greater Plan."

"Might   they   have   been   fewer?"  asked   the   Student,   doubtfully.

The  First Speaker  slowly shook his  head, "It  was the lower  limit. Less
could not possibly have carried conviction. In fact, pure objectivism would
have demanded seventy-five to  leave margin for error. Never mind. Have you
studied the course of action as worked out by the Speakers' Council fifteen
years ago?"

"Yes, Speaker."

"And compared it with actual developments?"

"Yes, Speaker." Then, after a pause

"I was quite amazed, Speaker."

"I know.  There is always amazement.  If you knew how  many men labored for
how many months  years, in fact  to bring about the polish of perfection,
you would be less amazed. Now tell me what happened  in words. I want your
translation of the mathematics."

"Yes, Speaker." The young  man marshaled his thoughts. "Essentially, it was
necessary for  the men of  the First Foundation to  be thoroughly convinced
that they  had located  and destroyed  the Second Foundation.  In that way,
there would be reversion to the intended original. To all intents, Terminus
would  once  again know  nothing  about us;  include  us in  none of  their
calculations.  We are hidden  once more, and  safe   at the cost  of fifty
men."

"And the purpose of the Kalganian war?"

"To show the Foundation that they could beat a physical enemy  to wipe out
the  damage done to  their self-esteem  and self-assuredness by  the Mule."

"There you  are insufficient in your  analysis. Remember, the population of
Terminus regarded  us with distinct ambivalence.  They hated and envied our
supposed superiority;  yet they relied on  us implicitly for protection. If
we had been 'destroyed' before the Kalganian war, it would have meant panic
throughout the  Foundation. They would  then never have had  the courage to
stand up against Stettin, when he then attacked; and he would have. Only in
the full  flush of  victory could the  'destruction' have taken  place with
minimum ill-effects.  Even waiting  a year, thereafter, might  have meant a
too-great cooling off spirit for success."

The Student nodded. "I see. Then the course of history will proceed without
deviation in the direction indicated by the Plan."

"Unless," pointed out the First Speaker, "further accidents, unforeseen and
individual, occur."

"And  for that,"  said the Student,  "we  still exist. Except  Except One
facet  of the  present  state of  affairs  worries me,  Speaker. The  First
Foundation is left with  the Mind Static device  a powerful weapon against
us. That, at least, is not as it was before."

"A good  point. But  they have no  one to use  it against. It  has become a
sterile device;  just as without the  spur of our own  menace against them,
encephalographic analysis will become a sterile science. Other varieties of
knowledge will  once again  bring more important and  immediate returns. So
this first generation of  mental scientists among the First Foundation will
also  be  the last   and,  in  a century,  Mind  Static will  be a  nearly
forgotten item of the past."

"Well"  The Student  was calculating  mentally. "I suppose  you're right."

But what I want you most to realize, young man, for the sake of your future
in the  Council is the  consideration given to the  tiny intermeshings that
were forced  into our plan of the last decade and  a half simply because we
dealt with individuals. There  was the manner in which Anthor had to create
suspicion against  himself in such a way that it  would mature at the right
time, but that was relatively simple.

"There was the manner in which the atmosphere was so manipulated that to no
one on Terminus would  it occur, prematurely, that Terminus itself might be
the  center they  were seeking. That  knowledge had  to be supplied  to the
young girl, Arcadia, who  would be heeded by no one but her own father. She
had to be sent  to Trantor, thereafter, to make certain that there would be
no premature  contact with  her father. Those  two were the two  poles of a
hyperatomic motor;  each being  inactive without the other.  And the switch
had to be thrown  contact had to be made  at just the right moment. I saw
to that!

"And the  final battle had  to be handled properly.  The Foundation's fleet
had to  be soaked in self-confidence, while the  fleet of Kalgan made ready
to run. I saw to that, also!"

Said the Student, "It  seems to me, Speaker, that you ... I mean, all of us
... were  counting on Dr. Darell not suspecting  that Arcadia was our tool.
According  to  my check  on the  calculations, there  was something  like a
thirty  percent probability  that  he  would  so  suspect. What  would have
happened then?"

"We  had  taken care  of  that.  What have  you  been  taught about  Tamper
Plateaus? What  are they? Certainly not evidence  of the introduction of an
emotional bias.  That can be done without  any chance of possible detection
by the most refined conceivable encephalographic analysis. A consequence of
Leffert's  Theorem,  you  know.  It is  the  removal,  the cutting-out,  of
previous emotional bias, that shows. It must show.

"And,  of course,  Anthor made  certain that  Darell knew all  about Tamper
Plateaus.

"However When  can an  individual be placed under  Control without showing
it? Where  there is no previous  emotional bias to remove.  In other words,
when  the individual is  a new-born infant  with a  blank slate of  a mind.
Arcadia Darell  was such an infant here on  Trantor fifteen years ago, when
the first  line was  drawn into the  structure of the plan.  She will never
know that she has been Controlled, and will be all the better for it, since
her  Control  involved  the development  of  a  precocious and  intelligent
personality."

The First  Speaker laughed shortly, "In a sense, it is  the irony of it all
that is most amazing. For four hundred years, so many men have been blinded
by Seldon's  words 'the other end  of the Galaxy.' They  have brought their
own peculiar,  physical-science thought  to the problem,  measuring off the
other end  with protractors  and rulers, ending  up eventually either  at a
point in  the periphery  one hundred eighty  degrees around the  rim of the
Galaxy, or back at the original point.

"Yet our  very greatest  danger lay in the  fact that there  was a possible
solution based  on physical modes of thought. The  Galaxy, you know, is not
simply  a flat  ovoid of  any sort;  nor is  the periphery a  closed curve.
Actually,  it is  a  double spiral,  with at  least  eighty percent  of the
inhabited planets on the Main Arm. Terminus is the extreme outer end of the
spiral arm, and we  are at the other  since, what is the opposite end of a
spiral? Why, the center.

"But that  is trifling.  It is an  accidental and irrelevant  solution. The
solution could  have been  reached immediately, if the  questioners had but
remembered that Hari Seldon was a social scientist not a physical scientist
and  adjusted their  thought processes  accordingly. What  could  'opposite
ends mean to a  social scientist? Opposite ends on the map? Of course not.
That's the mechanical interpretation only.

"The First  Foundation was at the periphery,  where the original Empire was
weakest,  where its civilizing  influence was  least, where its  wealth and
culture were  most nearly absent. And  where is the  social opposite end of
the  Galaxy? Why,  at the  place where  the original Empire  was strongest,
where its civilizing influence  was most, where its wealth and culture were
most strongly present.

"Here! At  the center! At Trantor, capital of  the Empire of Seldon's time.

"And it is so inevitable. Hari Seldon left the Second Foundation behind him
to maintain,  improve, and extend his work That  has been known, or guessed
at, for  fifty years. But where could that best  be done? At Trantor, where
Seldon's  group  had  worked,  and  where  the  data of  decades  had  been
accumulated. And it was the purpose of the Second Foundation to protect the
Plan against  enemies. That,  too, was known!  And where was  the source of
greatest danger to Terminus and the Plan?

"Here! Here  at Trantor, where the  Empire dying though it  was, could, for
three  centuries,  still destroy  the  Foundation,  if it  could only  have
decided to do so.

"Then  when Trantor  fell  and was  sacked and  utterly destroyed,  a short
century ago,  we were naturally  able to protect our  headquarters, and, on
all  the planet,  the Imperial  Library and  the grounds about  it remained
untouched.  This was  well-known to  the Galaxy,  but even  that apparently
overwhelming hint passed them by.

"It was here at Trantor that Ebling Mis discovered us; and here that we saw
to it that he  did not survive the discovery. To do so, it was necessary to
arrange  to have  a  normal Foundation  girl defeat  the  tremendous mutant
powers  of  the  Mule.  Surely,  such  a phenomenon  might  have  attracted
suspicion to  the planet  on which it  happened It was here  that we first
studied the Mule and  planned his ultimate defeat. It was here that Arcadia
was born and the  train of events begun that led to the great return to the
Seldon Plan.

"And all those flaws in our secrecy; those gaping holes; remained unnoticed
because  Seldon had  spoken of  'the other  end in  his way, and  they had
interpreted it in their way."

The First Speaker had long since stopped speaking to the Student. It was an
exposition to himself, really, as he stood before the window, looking up at
the incredible blaze of the firmament, at the huge Galaxy that was now safe
forever.

"Hari Seldon called Trantor, 'Star's End," he whispered, "and why not that
bit of poetic imagery. All the universe was once guided from this rock; all
the apron strings of  the stars led here. 'All roads lead to Trantor,' says
the old proverb, 'and that is where all stars end.'"

Ten months earlier, the  First Speaker had viewed those same crowding stars
 nowhere  as crowded as at  the center of that  huge cluster of matter Man
calls the Galaxy  with misgivings; but now there was a somber satisfaction
on  the   round  and   ruddy  face  of   Preem  Palver     First  Speaker.
The Cats of Ulthar by H.P. Lovecraft
The Cats of Ulthar
by H.P. Lovecraft
Written 15 Jun 1920 
Published November 1920 in The Tryout, Vol. 6, No. 11, p. 3-9. 
It is said that in Ulthar, which lies beyond the river Skai, no man may kill a 
cat; and this I can verily believe as I gaze upon him who sitteth purring before 
the fire. For the cat is cryptic, and close to strange things which men cannot 
see. He is the soul of antique Aegyptus, and bearer of tales from forgotten 
cities in Meroe and Ophir. He is the kin of the jungles lords, and heir to the 
secrets of hoary and sinister Africa. The Sphinx is his cousin, and he speaks 
her language; but he is more ancient than the Sphinx, and remembers that which 
she hath forgotten. 
In Ulthar, before ever the burgesses forbade the killing of cats, there dwelt an 
old cotter and his wife who delighted to trap and slay the cats of their 
neighbors. Why they did this I know not; save that many hate the voice of the 
cat in the night, and take it ill that cats should run stealthily about yards 
and gardens at twilight. But whatever the reason, this old man and woman took 
pleasure in trapping and slaying every cat which came near to their hovel; and 
from some of the sounds heard after dark, many villagers fancied that the manner 
of slaying was exceedingly peculiar. But the villagers did not discuss such 
things with the old man and his wife; because of the habitual expression on the 
withered faces of the two, and because their cottage was so small and so darkly 
hidden under spreading oaks at the back of a neglected yard. In truth, much as 
the owners of cats hated these odd folk, they feared them more; and instead of 
berating them as brutal assassins, merely took care that no cherished pet or 
mouser should stray toward the remote hovel under the dark trees. When through 
some unavoidable oversight a cat was missed, and sounds heard after dark, the 
loser would lament impotently; or console himself by thanking Fate that it was 
not one of his children who had thus vanished. For the people of Ulthar were 
simple, and knew not whence it is all cats first came. 
One day a caravan of strange wanderers from the South entered the narrow cobbled 
streets of Ulthar. Dark wanderers they were, and unlike the other roving folk 
who passed through the village twice every year. In the market-place they told 
fortunes for silver, and bought gay beads from the merchants. What was the land 
of these wanderers none could tell; but it was seen that they were given to 
strange prayers, and that they had painted on the sides of their wagons strange 
figures with human bodies and the heads of cats, hawks, rams and lions. And the 
leader of the caravan wore a headdress with two horns and a curious disk betwixt 
the horns. 
There was in this singular caravan a little boy with no father or mother, but 
only a tiny black kitten to cherish. The plague had not been kind to him, yet 
had left him this small furry thing to mitigate his sorrow; and when one is very 
young, one can find great relief in the lively antics of a black kitten. So the 
boy whom the dark people called Menes smiled more often than he wept as he sat 
playing with his graceful kitten on the steps of an oddly painted wagon. 
On the third morning of the wanderers stay in Ulthar, Menes could not find his 
kitten; and as he sobbed aloud in the market-place certain villagers told him of 
the old man and his wife, and of sounds heard in the night. And when he heard 
these things his sobbing gave place to meditation, and finally to prayer. He 
stretched out his arms toward the sun and prayed in a tongue no villager could 
understand; though indeed the villagers did not try very hard to understand, 
since their attention was mostly taken up by the sky and the odd shapes the 
clouds were assuming. It was very peculiar, but as the little boy uttered his 
petition there seemed to form overhead the shadowy, nebulous figures of exotic 
things; of hybrid creatures crowned with horn-flanked disks. Nature is full of 
such illusions to impress the imaginative. 
That night the wanderers left Ulthar, and were never seen again. And the 
householders were troubled when they noticed that in all the village there was 
not a cat to be found. From each hearth the familiar cat had vanished; cats 
large and small, black, grey, striped, yellow and white. Old Kranon, the 
burgomaster, swore that the dark folk had taken the cats away in revenge for the 
killing of Menes kitten; and cursed the caravan and the little boy. But Nith, 
the lean notary, declared that the old cotter and his wife were more likely 
persons to suspect; for their hatred of cats was notorious and increasingly 
bold. Still, no one durst complain to the sinister couple; even when little 
Atal, the innkeepers son, vowed that he had at twilight seen all the cats of 
Ulthar in that accursed yard under the trees, pacing very slowly and solemnly in 
a circle around the cottage, two abreast, as if in performance of some 
unheard-of rite of beasts. The villagers did not know how much to believe from 
so small a boy; and though they feared that the evil pair had charmed the cats 
to their death, they preferred not to chide the old cotter till they met him 
outside his dark and repellent yard. 
So Ulthar went to sleep in vain anger; and when the people awakened at 
dawnbehold! every cat was back at his accustomed hearth! Large and small, 
black, grey, striped, yellow and white, none was missing. Very sleek and fat did 
the cats appear, and sonorous with purring content. The citizens talked with one 
another of the affair, and marveled not a little. Old Kranon again insisted that 
it was the dark folk who had taken them, since cats did not return alive from 
the cottage of the ancient man .and his wife. But all agreed on one thing: that 
the refusal of all the cats to eat their portions of meat or drink their saucers 
of milk was exceedingly curious. And for two whole days the sleek, lazy cats of 
Ulthar would touch no food, but only doze by the fire or in the sun. 
It was fully a week before the villagers noticed that no lights were appearing 
at dusk in the windows of the cottage under the trees. Then the lean Nith 
remarked that no one had seen the old man or his wife since the night the cats 
were away. In another week the burgomaster decided to overcome his fears and 
call at the strangely silent dwelling as a matter of duty, though in so doing he 
was careful to take with him Shang the blacksmith and Thul the cutter of stone 
as witnesses. And when they had broken down the frail door they found only this: 
two cleanly picked human skeletons on the earthen floor, and a number of 
singular beetles crawling in the shadowy corners. 
There was subsequently much talk among the burgesses of Ulthar. Zath, the 
coroner, disputed at length with Nith, the lean notary; and Kranon and Shang and 
Thul were overwhelmed with questions. Even little Atal, the innkeepers son, was 
closely questioned and given a sweetmeat as reward. They talked of the old 
cotter and his wife, of the caravan of dark wanderers, of small Menes and his 
black kitten, of the prayer of Menes and of the sky during that prayer, of the 
doings of the cats on the night the caravan left, and of what was later found in 
the cottage under the dark trees in the repellent yard. 
And in the end the burgesses passed that remarkable law which is told of by 
traders in Hatheg and discussed by travelers in Nir; namely, that in Ulthar no 
man may kill a cat. 




 1998-1999 William Johns
Last modified: 12/18/1999 18:46:08
Cats And Dogs by H. P. LovecraftCats And Dogs
by H. P. Lovecraft
Written November 23, 1926 
Published in Something About Cats and Other Pieces, Arkham House, 1949 
Being told of the cat-and-dog fight about to occur in your literary club, I 
cannot resist contributing a few Thomastic yowls and sibilants upon my side of 
the dispute, though conscious that the word of a venerable ex-member can 
scarcely have much weight against the brilliancy of such still active adherents 
as may bark upon the other side. Aware of my ineptitude at argument, a valued 
correspondent has supplied me with the records of a similar controversy in the 
New York Tribune, in which Mr. Carl van Doran is on my side and Mr. Albert 
Payson Terhune on that of the canine tribe. From this I would be glad to 
plagiarise such data as I need; but my friend, with genuinely Machiavellian 
subtlety, has furnished me with only a part of the feline section whilst 
submitting the doggish brief in full. No doubt he imagines that this 
arrangement, in view of my own emphatic bias, makes for something like ultimate 
fairness; but for me it is exceedingly inconvenient, since it will force me to 
be more or less original in several parts of the ensuing remarks. 
Between dogs and cats my degree of choice is so great that it would never occur 
to me to compare the two. I have no active dislike for dogs, any more than I 
have for monkeys, human beings, tradesmen, cows, sheep, or pterodactyls; but for 
the cat I have entertained a particular respect and affection ever since the 
earliest days of my infancy. In its flawless grace and superior self-sufficiency 
I have seen a symbol of the perfect beauty and bland impersonality of the 
universe itself, objectively considered, and in its air of silent mystery there 
resides for me all the wonder and fascination of the unknown. The dog appeals to 
cheap and facile emotions; the cat to the deepest founts of imagination and 
cosmic perception in the human mind. It is no accident that the contemplative 
Egyptians, together with such later poetic spirits as Poe, Gautier, Baudelaire 
and Swinburne, were all sincere worshippers of the supple grimalkin. 
Naturally, one's preference in the matter of cats and dogs depends wholly upon 
one's temperament and point of view. The dog would appear to me to be the 
favorite of superficial, sentimental, and emotional people -- people who feel 
rather than think, who attach importance to mankind and the popular conventional 
emotions of the simple, and who find their greatest consolation in the fawning 
and dependent attachments of a gregarious society. Such people live in a limited 
world of imagination; accepting uncritically the values of common folklore, and 
always preferring to have their naive beliefs, feelings, and prejudices tickled, 
rather than to enjoy a purely aesthetic and philosophic pleasure arising from 
discrimination, contemplation, and the recognition of austere, absolute beauty. 
This is not to say that the cheaper elements do not also reside in the average 
cat-lover's love of cats, but merely to point out that in ailurophily there 
exists a basis of true aestheticism which kynophily does not possess. The real 
lover of cats is one who demands a clearer adjustment to the universe than 
ordinary household platitudes provide; one who refuses to swallow the 
sentimental notion that all good people love dogs, children, and horses while 
all bad people dislike and are disliked by such. He is unwilling to set up 
himself and his cruder feelings as a measure of universal values, or to allow 
shallow ethical notions to warp his judgment. In a word, he had rather admire 
and respect than effuse and dote; and does not fall into the fallacy that 
pointless sociability and friendliness, or slavering devotion and obedience, 
constitute anything intrinsically admirable or exalted. Dog-lovers base their 
whole case on these commonplace, servile, and plebeian qualities, and amusingly 
judge the intelligence of a pet by its degree of conformity to their own wishes. 
Cat-lovers escape this delusion, repudiate the idea that cringing subservience 
and sidling companionship to man are supreme merits, and stand free to worship 
aristocratic independence, self-respect, and individual personality joined to 
extreme grace and beauty as typified by the cool, lithe, cynical and unconquered 
lord of the housetops. 
Persons of commonplace ideas -- unimaginative worthy burghers who are satisfied 
with the daily round of things and who subscribe to the popular credo of 
sentimental values -- will always be dog-lovers. To them nothing will ever be 
more important than themselves and their own primitive feelings, and they will 
never cease to esteem and glorify the fellow-animal who best typifies these. 
Such persons are submerged in the vortex of Oriental idealism and abasement 
which ruined classic civilisation in the Dark Ages, and live in a bleak world of 
abstract sentimental values wherein the mawkish illusions of meekness, 
gentleness, brotherhood, and whining humility are magnified into supreme 
virtues, and a whole false ethic and philosophy erected on the timid reactions 
of the flexor system of muscles. This heritage, ironically foisted on us when 
Roman politics raised the faith of a whipped and broken people to supremacy in 
the later empire, has naturally kept a strong hold over the weak and 
sentimentally thoughtless; and perhaps reached its culmination in the insipid 
nineteenth century, when people were wont to praise dogs "because they are so 
human" (as if humanity were any valid standard of merit!), and honest Edwin 
Landseer painted hundreds of smug Fidoes and Carlos and Rovers with all the 
anthropoid triviality, pettiness, and "cuteness" of eminent Victorians. 
But amidst this chaos of intellectual and emotional groveling a few free souls 
have always stood out for the old civilised realities which mediaevalism 
eclipsed -- the stern classic loyalty to truth, strength, and beauty given a 
clear mind and uncowed spirit to the full-living Western Aryan confronted by 
Nature's majesty, loveliness, and aloofness. This is the virile aesthetic and 
ethic of the extensor muscles -- the bold, buoyant, assertive beliefs and 
preferences of proud, dominant, unbroken and unterrified conquerors, hunters, 
and warriors -- and it has small use for the shams and whimperings of the 
brotherly, affection- slobbering peacemaker and cringer and sentimentalist. 
Beauty and sufficiency -- twin qualities of the cosmos itself -- are the gods of 
this unshackled and pagan type; to the worshipper of such eternal things the 
supreme virtue will not be found in lowliness, attachment, obedience, and 
emotional messiness. This sort of worshipper will look for that which best 
embodies the loveliness of the stars and the worlds and the forests and the seas 
and the sunsets, and which best acts out the blandness, lordliness, accuracy, 
self-sufficiency, cruelty, independence, and contemptuous and capricious 
impersonality of the all governing Nature. Beauty -- coolness -- aloofness -- 
philosophic repose -- self-sufficiency -- untamed mastery -- where else can we 
find these things incarnated with even half the perfection and completeness that 
mark their incarnation in the peerless and softly gliding cat, which performs 
its mysterious orbit with the relentless and obtrusive certainty of a planet in 
infinity? 
That dogs are dear to the unimaginative peasant-burgher whilst cats appeal to 
the sensitive poet-aristocrat- philosopher will be clear in a moment when we 
reflect on the matter of biological association. Practical plebeian folk judge a 
thing only by its immediate touch, taste, and smell; while more delicate types 
form their estimates from the linked images and ideas which the object calls up 
in their minds. Now when dogs and cats are considered, the stolid churl sees 
only the two animals before him, and bases his favour on their relative capacity 
to pander to his sloppy, uniformed ideas of ethics and friendship and flattering 
subservience. On the other hand the gentleman and thinker sees each in all its 
natural affiliations, and cannot fail to notice that in the great symmetries of 
organic life dogs fall in with slovenly wolves and foxes and jackals and coyotes 
and dingoes and painted hyaenas, whilst cats walk proudly with the jungle's 
lords, and own the haughty lion, the sinuous leopard, the regal tiger, and the 
shapely panther and jaguar as their kin. Dogs are the hieroglyphs of blind 
emotion, inferiority, servile attachment, and gregariousness -- the attributes 
of commonplace, stupidly passionate, and intellectually and imaginatively 
underdeveloped men. Cats are the runes of beauty, invincibility, wonder, pride, 
freedom, coldness, self-sufficiency, and dainty individuality -- the qualities 
of sensitive, enlightened, mentally developed, pagan, cynical, poetic, 
philosophic, dispassionate, reserved, independent, Nietzschean, unbroken, 
civilised, master-class men. The dog is a peasant and the cat is a gentleman. 
We may, indeed, judge the tone and bias of a civilisation by its relative 
attitude toward dogs and cats. The proud Egypt wherein Pharaoh was Pharaoh and 
pyramids rose in beauty at the wish of him who dreamed them bowed down to the 
cat, and temples were built to its goddess at Bubastis. In imperial Rome the 
graceful leopard adorned most homes of quality, lounging in insolent beauty in 
the atrium with golden collar and chain; while after the age of the Antonines 
the actual cat was imported from Egypt and cherished as a rare and costly 
luxury. So much for the dominant and enlightened peoples. When, however, we come 
to the groveling Middle Ages with their superstitions and ecstasies and 
monasticisms and maunderings over saints and their relics, we find the cool and 
impersonal loveliness of the felidae in very low esteem; and behold a sorry 
spectacle of hatred and cruelty shown toward the beautiful little creature whose 
mousing virtues alone gained it sufferance amongst the ignorant churls who 
resented its self-respecting coolness and feared its cryptical and elusive 
independence as something akin to the dark powers of witchcraft. These boorish 
slaves of eastern darkness could not tolerate what did not serve their own cheap 
emotions and flimsy purposes. They wished a dog to fawn and hunt and fetch and 
carry, and had no use for the cat's gift of eternal disinterested beauty to feed 
the spirit. One can imagine how they must have resented Pussy's magnificent 
reposefulness, unhurriedness, relaxation, and scorn for trivial human aims and 
concernments. Throw a stick, and the servile dog wheezes and pants and stumbles 
to bring it to you. Do the same before a cat, and he will eye you with coolly 
polite and somewhat bored amusement. And just as inferior people prefer the 
inferior animal which scampers excitedly because someone else wants something, 
so do superior people respect the superior animal which lives its own life and 
knows that the puerile stick-throwings of alien bipeds are none of its business 
and beneath its notice. The dog barks and begs and tumbles to amuse you when you 
crack the whip. That pleases a meekness-loving peasant who relishes a stimulus 
to his self importance. The cat, on the other hand, charms you into playing for 
its benefit when it wishes to be amused; making you rush about the room with a 
paper on a string when it feels like exercise, but refusing all your attempts to 
make it play when it is not in the humour. That is personality and individuality 
and self-respect -- the calm mastery of a being whose life is its own and not 
yours -- and the superior person recognises and appreciates this because he too 
is a free soul whose position is assured, and whose only law is his own heritage 
and aesthetic sense. Altogether, we may see that the dog appeals to those 
primitive emotional souls whose chief demands on the universe are for 
meaningless affection, aimless companionship, and flattering attention and 
subservience; whilst the cat reigns among those more contemplative and 
imaginative spirits who ask of the universe only the objective sight of 
poignant, ethereal beauty and the animate symbolisation of Nature's bland, 
relentless, reposeful, unhurried and impersonal order and sufficiency. The dog 
gives, but the cat is. 
Simple folk always overstress the ethical element in life, and it is quite 
natural that they should extend it to the realm of their pets. Accordingly, we 
hear many inane dicta in favour of dogs on the ground that they are faithful, 
whilst cats are treacherous. Now just what does this really mean? Where are the 
points of reference? Certainly, the dog has so little imagination and 
individuality that it knows no motives but its master's; but what sophisticated 
mind can descry a positive virtue in this stupid abnegation of its birthright? 
Discrimination must surely award the palm to the superior cat, which has too 
much natural dignity to accept any scheme of things but its own, and which 
consequently cares not one whit what any clumsy human thinks or wishes or 
expects of it. It is not treacherous, because it has never acknowledged any 
allegiance to anything outside its own leisurely wishes; and treachery basically 
implies a departure from some covenant explicitly recognised. The cat is a 
realist, and no hypocrite. He takes what pleases him when he wants it, and gives 
no promises. He never leads you to expect more from him than he gives, and if 
you choose to be stupidly Victorian enough to mistake his purrs and rubbings of 
self-satisfaction for marks of transient affection toward you, that is no fault 
of his. He would not for a moment have you believe that he wants more of you 
than food and warmth and shelter and amusement -- and he is certainly justified 
in criticising your aesthetic and imaginative development if you fail to find 
his grace, beauty, and cheerful decorative influence an aboundingly sufficient 
repayment for all you give him. The cat-lover need not be amazed at another's 
love for dogs -- indeed, he may also possess this quality himself; for dogs are 
often very comely, and as lovable in a condescending way as a faithful old 
servant or tenant in the eyes of a master -- but he cannot help feeling 
astonished at those who do not share his love for cats. The cat is such a 
perfect symbol of beauty and superiority that it seems scarcely possible for any 
true aesthete and civilised cynic to do other than worship it. We call ourselves 
a dog's "master" -- but who ever dared call himself the "master" of a cat? We 
own a dog -- he is with us as a slave and inferior because we wish him to be. 
But we entertain a cat -- he adorns our hearth as a guest, fellow-lodger, and 
equal because he wishes to be there. It is no compliment to be the stupidly 
idolised master of a dog whose instinct it is to idolise, but it is a very 
distinct tribute to be chosen as the friend and confidant of a philosophic cat 
who is wholly his own master and could easily choose another companion if he 
found such a one more agreeable and interesting. A trace, I think, of this great 
truth regarding the higher dignity of the cat has crept into folklore in the use 
of the names "cat" and "dog" as terms of opprobrium. Whilst "cat" has never been 
applied to any sort of offender more than the mildly spiteful and innocuously 
sly female gossip and commentator, the words "dog" and "cur" have always been 
linked with vileness, dishonor, and degradation of the gravest type. In the 
crystallisation of this nomenclature there has undoubtedly been present in the 
popular mind some dim, half-unconscious realisation that there are depths of 
slinking, whining, fawning, and servile ignobility which no kith of the lion and 
the leopard could ever attain. The cat may fall low, but he is always unbroken. 
He is, like the Nordic among men, one of those who govern their own lives or 
die. 
We have but to glance analytically at the two animals to see the points pile up 
in favour of the cat. Beauty, which is probably the only thing of any basic 
significance in all the cosmos, ought to be our chief criterion; and here the 
cat excels so brilliantly that all comparisons collapse. Some dogs, it is true, 
have beauty in a very ample degree; but even the highest level of canine beauty 
falls far below the feline average. The cat is classic whilst the dog is Gothic 
-- nowhere in the animal world can we discover such really Hellenic perfection 
of form, with anatomy adapted to function, as in the felidae. Puss is a Doric 
temple -- an Ionic colonnade -- in the utter classicism of its structural and 
decorative harmonies. And this is just as true kinetically as statically, for 
art has no parallel for the bewitching grace of the cat's slightest motion. The 
sheer, perfect aestheticism of kitty's lazy stretchings, industrious 
face-washings, playful rollings, and little involuntary shiftings in sleep is 
something as keen and vital as the best pastoral poetry or genre painting; 
whilst the unerring accuracy of his leaping and springing, running and hunting, 
has an art-value just as high in a more spirited way but it is his capacity for 
leisure and repose which makes the cat preeminent. Mr. Carl Van Vechten, in 
"Peter Whiffle," holds up the timeless restfulness of the cat as a model for 
life's philosophy, and Prof. William Lyon Phelps has very effectively captured 
the secret of felinity when he says that the cat does not merely lie down, but 
"pours his body out on the floor like a glass of water". What other creature has 
thus merged the aestheticism of mechanics and hydraulics? Contrast this with the 
inept panting, wheezing, fumbling, drooling, scratching, and general clumsiness 
of the average dog with his false and wasted motions. And in the details of 
neatness the fastidious cat is of course immeasurably ahead. We always love to 
touch a cat, but only the insensitive can uniformly welcome the frantic and 
humid nuzzlings and pawings of a dusty and perhaps not inodorous canine which 
leaps and fusses and writhes about in awkward feverishness for no particular 
reason save that blind nerve-centres have been spurred by certain meaningless 
stimuli. There is a wearying excess of bad manners in all this doggish fury -- 
well-bred people don't paw and maul one, and surely enough we invariably find 
the cat gentle and reserved in his advances, and delicate even when he glides 
gracefully into your lap with cultivated purrs, or leaps whimsical on the table 
where you are writing to play with your pen in modulated, seriocomic pats. I do 
not wonder that Mahomet, that sheik of perfect manners, loved cats for their 
urbanity and disliked dogs for their boorishness; or that cats are the favorites 
in the polite Latin countries whilst dogs take the lead in heavy, practical, and 
beer-drinking Central Europe. Watch a cat eat, and then watch a dog. The one is 
held in check by an inherent and inescapable daintiness, and lends a kind of 
grace to one of the most ungraceful of all processes. The dog, on the other 
hand, is wholly repulsive in his bestial and insatiate greediness; living up to 
his forest kinship of "wolfing" most openly and unashamedly. Returning to beauty 
of line -- is it not significant that while many normal breeds of dogs are 
conspicuously and admittedly ugly, no healthy and well-developed feline of any 
species whatsoever is other than beautiful? There are, of course, many ugly 
cats; but these are always individual cases of mongrelism, malnutrition, 
deformity, or injury. No breed of cats in its proper condition can by any 
stretch of the imagination be thought of as even slightly ungraceful -- a record 
against which must be pitted the depressing spectacle of impossibly flattened 
bulldogs, grotesquely elongated dachshunds, hideously shapeless and shaggy 
Airedales, and' the like. Of course, it may be said that no aesthetic standard 
is other than relative -- but we always work with such standards as we 
empirically have, and in comparing cats and dogs under the Western European 
aesthetic we cannot be unfair to either. If any undiscovered tribe in Tibet 
finds Airedales beautiful and Persian cats ugly, we will not dispute them on 
their own territory -- but just now we are dealing with ourselves and our 
territory, and here the verdict would not admit of much doubt even from the most 
ardent kynophile. Such an one usually passes the problem off in an epigrammatic 
paradox, and says that "Snookums is so homely, he's pretty!" This is the 
childish penchant for the grotesque and tawdrily "cute" which we see likewise 
embodied in popular cartoons, freak dolls, and all the malformed decorative 
trumpery of the "Billikin" or "Krazy Kat" order found in the "dens" and "cosy 
corners" of the would-be-sophisticated yokelry. 
In the matter of intelligence we find the caninites making amusing claims -- 
amusing because they so naively measure what they conceive to be an animal's 
intelligence by its degree of subservience to the human will. A dog will 
retrieve, a cat will not; therefore (sic!) the dog is the more intelligent. Dogs 
can be more elaborately trained for the circus and vaudeville acts than cats, 
therefore (O Zeus, O Royal Mount!) they are cerebrally superior. Now of course 
this is all the sheerest nonsense. We would not call a weak-spirited man more 
intelligent than an independent citizen because we can make him vote as we wish 
whereas we can't influence the independent citizen, yet countless persons apply 
an exactly parallel argument in appraising the grey matter of dogs and cats. 
Competition in servility is something to which no self-respecting Thomas or 
Tabitha ever stooped, and it is plain that any really effective estimate of 
canine and feline intelligence must proceed from a careful observation of dogs 
and cats in a detached state -- uninfluenced by human beings -- as they 
formulate certain objectives of their own and use their own mental equipment in 
achieving them. When we do this, we arrive at a very wholesome respect for our 
purring hearthside friend who makes so little display about his wishes and 
business methods; for in every conception and calculation he shows a steel--cold 
and deliberate union of intellect, will, and sense of proportion which puts 
utterly to shame the emotional sloppings-over and docilely acquired artificial 
tricks of the "clever" and "faithful" pointer or sheep-dog. Watch a cat decide 
to move through a door, and see how patiently he waits for his opportunity, 
never losing sight of his purpose even when he finds it expedient to feign other 
interests in the interim. Watch him in the thick of the chase, and compare his 
calculating patience and quite study of his terrain with the noisy floundering 
and pawing of his canine rival. It is not often that he returns empty-handed. He 
knows what he wants, and means to get it in the most effective way, even at the 
sacrifice of time -- which he philosophically recognises as unimportant in the 
aimless cosmos. There is no turning him aside or distracting his attention -- 
and we. know that among humans this is the quality of mental tenacity, this 
ability to carry a single thread through complex distractions, is considered a 
pretty good sign of intellectual vigour and maturity. Children, old crones, 
peasants, and dogs ramble, cats and philosophers stick to their point. In 
resourcefulness, too, the cat attests his superiority. Dogs can be well trained 
to do a single thing, but psychologists tell us that these responses to an 
automatic memory instilled from outside are of little worth as indices of real 
intelligence. To judge the abstract development of a brain, confront it with new 
and unfamiliar conditions and see how well its own strength enables it to 
achieve its object by sheer reasoning without blazed trails. Here the cats can 
silently devise a dozen mysterious and successful alternatives whilst poor Fido 
is barking in bewilderment and wondering what it is all about. Granted that 
Rover the retriever may make a greater bid for popular sentimental regard by 
going into the burning house and saving the baby in traditional cinema fashion, 
it remains a fact that whiskered and purring Nig is a higher-grade biological 
organism -- something physiologically and psychologically nearer a man because 
of his very freedom from man's orders, and as such entitled to a higher respect 
from those who judge by purely philosophic and aesthetic standards. We can 
respect a cat as we cannot respect a dog, no matter which personally appeals the 
more to our mere doting fancy; and if we be aesthetes and analysts rather than 
commonplace-lovers and emotionalists, the scales must inevitably turn completely 
in kitty's favour. 
It may be added, moreover, that even the aloof and sufficient cat is by no means 
devoid of sentimental appeal. Once we get rid of the uncivilised ethical bias -- 
the "treacherous" and "horrid bird-catcher" prejudice -- we find in the 
"harmless cat" the very apex of happy domestic symbolism; whilst small kittens 
become objects to adore, idealise, and celebrate in the most rhapsodic of 
dactyls and anapaests, iambics and trochaics. I, in my own senescent mellowness, 
confess to an inordinate and wholly unphilosophic predilection for tiny 
coal-black kittens with large yellow eyes, and could no more pass one without 
petting him than Dr. Johnson could pass a sidewalk post without striking it. 
There is, likewise, in many cats quite analogous to the reciprocal fondness so 
loudly extolled in dogs, human beings, horses, and the like. Cats come to 
associate certain persons with acts continuously contributing to their pleasure, 
and acquire for them a recognition and attachment which manifests itself in 
pleasant excitement at their approach -- whether or not bearing food and drink 
-- and a certain pensiveness at their protracted absence. A cat with whom I was 
on intimate terms reached the point of accepting food from no hand but one, and 
would actually go hungry rather than touch the least morsel from a kindly 
neighbour source. He also had distinct affections amongst the other cats of that 
idyllic household; voluntarily offering food to one of his whiskered friends, 
whilst disputing most savagely the least glance which his coal-black rival 
"Snowball" would bestow upon his plate. If it be argued that these feline 
fondnesses are essentially "selfish" and "practical" in their ultimate 
composition, let us inquire in return how many human fondnesses, apart from 
those springing directly upon primitive brute instinct, have any other basis. 
After the returning board has brought in the grand total of zero we shall be 
better able to refrain from ingenuous censure of the "selfish" cat. 
The superior imaginative inner life of the cat, resulting in superior 
self-possession, is well known. A dog is a pitiful thing, depending wholly on 
companionship, and utterly lost except in packs or by the side of his master. 
Leave him alone and he does not know what to do except bark and howl and trot 
about till sheer exhaustion forces him to sleep. A cat, however, is never 
without the potentialities of contentment. Like a superior man, he knows how to 
be alone and happy. Once he looks about and finds no one to amuse him, he 
settles down to the task of amusing himself; and no one really knows cats 
without having occasionally peeked stealthily at some lively and well- balanced 
kitten which believes itself to be alone. Only after such a glimpse of 
unaffected tail-chasing grace and unstudied purring can one fully understand the 
charm of those lines which Coleridge wrote with reference to the human rather 
than the feline young -- page eleven 
  ".... a limber elf, 
  Singing, dancing to itself." 
But whole volumes could be written on the playing of cats, since the varieties 
and aesthetic aspects of such sportiveness are infinite. Be it sufficient to say 
that in such pastimes cats have exhibited traits and actions which psychologists 
authentically declare to be motivated by genuine humour and whimsicality in its 
purest sense; so that the task of "making a cat laugh" may not be so impossible 
a thing even outside the borders of Cheshire. In short, a dog is an incomplete 
thing. Like an inferior man, he needs emotional stimuli from outside, and must 
set something artificial up as a god and motive. The cat, however, is perfect in 
himself. Like the human philosopher, he is a self- sufficient entity and 
microcosm. He is a real and integrated being because he thinks and feels himself 
to be such, whereas the dog can conceive of himself only in relation to 
something else. Whip a dog and he licks your hand -frauth! The beast has no idea 
of himself except as an inferior part of an organism whereof you are the 
superior part -- he would no more think of striking back at you than you would 
think of pounding your own head when it punishes you with a headache. But whip a 
cat and watch it glare and move backward hissing in outraged dignity and 
self-respect! One more blow, and it strikes you in return; for it is a gentleman 
and your equal, and will accept no infringement on its personality and body of 
privileges. It is only in your house anyway because it wishes to be, or perhaps 
even as a condescending favour to yourself. It is the house, not you, it likes; 
for philosophers realise that human beings are at best only minor adjuncts to 
scenery. Go one step too far, and it leaves you altogether. You have mistaken 
your relationship to it and imagined you are its master, and no real cat can 
tolerate that breach of good manners. Henceforward it will seek companions of 
greater discrimination and clearer perspective. Let anaemic persons who believe 
in "turning the other cheek" console themselves with cringing dogs -- for the 
robust pagan with the blood of Nordic twilights in his veins there is no beast 
like the cat; intrepid steed of Freya, who can boldly look even Thor and Odin 
full in the face and stare with great round eyes of undimmed yellow or green. 
In these observations I believe I have outlined with some fullness the diverse 
reasons why, in my opinion and in the smartly timed title-phrase of Mr. Van 
Doren, "gentlemen prefer cats." The reply of Mr.Terhune in a subsequent issue of 
the Tribune appears to me beside the point; insomuch as it is less a refutation 
of facts than a mere personal affirmation of the author's membership in that 
conventional "very human" majority who take affection and companionship 
seriously, enjoy being important to something alive, hate a "parasite" on mere 
ethical ground without consulting the right of beauty to exist for its own 
sake, and therefore love man's noblest and most faithful friend, the perennial 
dog. I suppose Mr.Terhune loves horses and babies also, for the three go 
conventionally together in the great hundred-per-center's credo as highly 
essential likings for every good and lovable he-man of the Arrow Collar and 
Harold Bell Wright hero school, even though the automobile and Margaret Sanger 
have done much to reduce the last two items. 
Dogs, then, are peasants and the pets of peasants, cats are gentlemen and the 
pets of gentlemen. The dog is for him who places crude feeling and outgrown 
ethic and humanocentricity above austere and disinterested beauty; who just 
loves "folks and folksiness" and doesn't mind sloppy clumsiness if only 
something will truly care for him. (Tableau of dog across master's grave -- cf. 
Lanseer, "The Old Shepherd's Chief Mourner.") The guy who isn't much for 
highbrow stuff, but is always on the square and don't (sic) often find the 
Saddypost or the N.Y. World too deep for him; who hadn't much use for Valentino, 
but thinks Doug Fairbanks is just about right for an evening's entertainment. 
Wholesome -- constructive -- non-morbid -- civic-minded -- domestic -- (I forgot 
to mention the radio) normal -- that's the sort of go-getter that ought to go in 
for dogs. 
The cat is for the aristocrat -- whether by birth or inclinations or both - who 
admires his fellow-aristocrats. He is for the man who appreciates beauty as the 
one living force in a blind and purposeless universe, and who worships that 
beauty in all its forms without regard for the sentimental and ethical illusions 
of the moment. For the man who knows the hollowness of feeling and the emptiness 
of human objects and aspirations, and who therefore clings solely to what is 
real -- as beauty is real because it pretends to a significance beyond the 
emotion which it excites and is. For the man who feels sufficient in the cosmos, 
and asks no scruples of conventional prejudice, but loves repose and strength 
and freedom and luxury and sufficiency and contemplation; who as a strong 
fearless soul wishes something to respect instead of something to lick his face 
and accept his alternate blows and strokings; who seeks a proud and beautiful 
equal in the peerage of individualism rather than a cowed and cringing satellite 
in the hierarchy of fear, subservience, and devolution. The cat is not for the 
brisk, self-important little worker with a mission" , but for the enlightened 
dreaming poet who knows that the world contains nothing really worth doing. The 
dilettante -- the connoisseur -- the decadent, if you will, though in a 
healthier age than this there were things for such men to do, so that they were 
the planners and leader of those glorious pagan times. The cat is for him who 
does things not for empty duty but for power, pleasure, splendour, romance, and 
glamour -- for the harpist who sings alone in the night of old battles, or the 
warrior who goes out to fight such battles for beauty, glory, fame and the 
splendour of a land athwart which no shadow of weakness falls. For him who will 
be lulled by no sops of prose and usefulness, but demands for his comfort the 
ease and beauty and ascendancy and cultivation which make effort worth while. 
For the man who knows that play, not work, and leisure, not bustle, are the 
great things of life; and that the round of striving merely in order to strive 
some more is a bitter irony of which the civilised soul accepts as little as it 
can. 
Beauty, sufficiency, ease, and good manners -- what more can civilisation 
require? We have them all in the divine monarch who lounges gloriously on his 
silken cushion before the hearth. Loveliness and joy for their own sake -- pride 
and harmony and coordination -- spirit, restfulness and completeness -- all here 
are present, and need but a sympathetic disillusionment for worship in full 
measure. What fully civilised soul but would eagerly serve as high priest of 
Bast? The star of the cat, I think, is just now in the ascendant, as we emerge 
little by little from the dreams of ethics and conformity which clouded the 
nineteenth century and raised the grubbing and unlovely dog to the pinnacle of 
sentimental regard. Whether a renaissance of power and beauty will restore our 
Western civilisation, or whether the forces of disintegration are already too 
powerful for any hand to check, none may yet say, but in the present moment of 
cynical world-unmasking between the pretence of the eighteen-hundreds and the 
ominous mystery of the decades ahead we have at least a flash of the old pagan 
perspective and the old pagan clearness and honesty. 
And one idol lit up by that flash, seen fair and lovely on a dream-throne of 
silk and gold under a chryselephantine dome, is a shape of deathless grace not 
always given its due among groping mortals -- the haughty, the unconquered, the 
mysterious, the luxurious, the Babylonian, the impersonal, the eternal companion 
of superiority and art -- the type of perfect beauty and the brother of poetry 
-- the bland, grave, compliant, and patrician cat. 



Document modified: 03/10/2000 15:24:28 